Economic Calculation in the
Socialist Commonwealth

Economic Calculation
in the Socialist Commonwealth

Ludwig von Mises
Translated from German by S. Adler

MISES
INSTITUTE
AUBURN, ALABAMA

“Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth”
appeared originally under the title “Die Wirtschaftsrechnung im sozialistischen Gemeinwesen” in the Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaften 47 (1920). The present translation
was first published in F.A. Hayek, ed., Collectivist Economic Planning (London: George Routledge & Sons,
1935; reprint, Clifton, N.J.: Augustus M. Kelley, 1975),
pp. 87–130. Some annotations appear in this edition
and they are set aside in brackets.

Copyright © 1990 Mrs. Margit von Mises
Foreword, Introduction to this Edition, and Postscript
Copyright © 1990 by the Ludwig von Mises Institute
Reprinted by the Ludwig von Mises Institute 2008,
2012
All rights reserved. Written permission must be secured
from the publisher to use or reproduce any part of this
book, except for brief quotations in critical reviews or
articles.
Ludwig von Mises Institute
518 West Magnolia Avenue
Auburn, Alabama 36832
mises.org
ISBN: 978-1-61016-550-1

Contents
Foreword by Yuri N. Maltsev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Introduction to this Edition by Jacek Kochanowicz . . . . . xi
Introduction by Ludwig von Mises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvii
1. The Distribution of Consumption Goods
in the Socialist Commonwealth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
2. The Nature of Economic Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3. Economic Calculation in the Socialist
Commonwealth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4. Responsibility and Initiative in Communal
Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5. The Most Recent Socialist Doctrines and the
Problem of Econoimc Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Postscript by Joseph T. Salerno . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

v

Foreword

T

he twentieth century has witnessed the beginning,
development, and end of the most tragic experiment
in human history: socialism. The experiment resulted
in tremendous human losses, destruction of potentially
rich economies, and colossal ecological disasters. The
experiment has ended, but the devastation will affect the
lives and health of generations to come.
The real tragedy of this experiment is that Ludwig von
Mises and his followers—among the best economic minds
of this century—had exposed the truth about socialism in
1920, yet their warnings went unheeded.
In this essay, “Economic Calculation in the Socialist
Commonwealth,” Mises examines Marxism’s most fundamental claims. In doing so, Mises exposes socialism as a
utopian scheme that is illogical, uneconomic, and unworkable at its core. It is “impossible” and must fail because it
is devoid of economic rationale; it provides no means for
any objective basis of economic calculation and thus no
way to assign resources to their most productive uses. In
1920, howeverthe enthusiasm for socialism was so strong,
especially among Western intellectuals, that Mises’s short
and insightful masterpiece was either not understood or
deliberately distorted by his critics.
vii

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

Yet the actual implementation of socialism showed
the complete validity of his analysis. Socialism attempted
to replace billions of individual decisions made by sovereign consumers in the market with “rational economic
planning” by a few vested with the power to determine
the who, what, how, and when of production and consumption. It led to widespread shortages, starvation, and
mass frustration of the population. When the Soviet government set 22 million prices, 460,000 wage rates, and
over 90 million work quotas for 110 million government
employees, chaos and shortages were the inevitable result.
The socialist state destroyed work ethic, deprived people
of entrepreneurial opportunity and initiative, and led to a
widespread welfare mentality.
Socialism produced political monsters like Stalin and Mao
Tse-Tung, and led to unheard-of crimes against humanity in
all communist states. The destruction of Russia and Kampuchea, the humiliation of the Chinese and Eastern European
people, are not “distortions of socialism” as the defenders of
this doctrine would like to convince us: they are inevitable
consequences of the destruction of the market which started
with an attempt to replace the economic decisions of free individuals by the “wisdom of the planners.”
The real character of the so-called centrally planned
economy is well illustrated by a quip I heard several years
ago by Soviet economist Nikolai Fedorenko. He said that
a fully balanced, checked, and detailed economic plan for
the next year would be ready, with the help of computers,
in 30,000 years. There are millions of product variants;
there are hundreds of thousands of enterprises; it is necessary to make billions of decisions on inputs and outputs;
viii

Ludwig von Mises

the plans must relate to labor force, material supplies, wages, costs, prices, “planned profits,” investments, transportation, storage, and distribution. These decisions originate
from different parts of the planning hierarchy. They are,
as a rule, inconsistent and contradictory to each other because they reflect the conflicting interests of different strata
of bureaucracy. Because the next year’s plan must be ready
by next year, and not in 29,999 years, it is inevitably neither balanced nor rational. And Mises proved that without
private property in the means of production, even with
30,000 years of computer time, they still couldn’t make
socialism work.
The defenders of socialism found themselves in a theoretical and practical deadlock as soon as they destroyed
the institution of private property. Thus they resorted to
the creation of artificial schemes. In the Soviet economy,
profit is planned as a function of the cost. Enterprises are
given “control figures” which determine the “planned profits” as a percentage of the costs. Thus the more you spend,
the higher your profits. Under conditions of 100 percent
monopolization, this simple device completely ruined the
economies of the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and other
“socialist” states to an extent comparable only to the barbarian invasions of Rome.
Today, the disastrous consequences of enforcing the
utopia on the unfortunate populations of the communist
states are clear even to their leaders. As Mises predicted,
despite the “cloud-cuckoo lands of their fancy,” roasted pigeons failed to fly into the mouths of the comrades. And
even according to official Soviet statistics, 234 of 277 basic
consumer goods included by the USSR State Committee
ix

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

on Statistics in the “market basket” of the Soviet people are
“missing” from the state distribution system.
Yet Western advocates of socialism are still singing the
old tune about the necessity to restrict property rights and
replace the market with the “wisdom” of rational central
planning.
In 1920, the world neglected or rejected Mises’s warning that “socialism is the abolition of rational economy.”
We cannot afford to repeat this mistake today. We must stay
alert to all schemes that would draw us into a new round
of state experimentation on the people and the economy.
“Private property of the material factors of production,” Mises emphasized, “is not a restriction of the freedom of all other people to choose what suits them. It is, on
the contrary, the means that assigns to the common man
in his capacity as a buyer, supremacy in all economic affairs. It is the means to stimulate a nation’s most enterprising men to exert themselves to the best of their abilities in
the service of all of the people.”
We must never again forget or ignore the insights of
this great thinker, for the sake of liberty and the generations to come.
Yuri N. Maltsev
Senior Fellow, International Center for Development Policy;
The Ludwig von Mises Institute;
and Senior Researcher, Institute of Economics, Academy
of Sciences, USSR (1987–89)
April 1990

x

Introduction to this Edition

L

udwig von Mises’s seminal refutation of socialist economics, republished here, was written seventy years
ago, but it is a description of the “real socialism” of
today—or rather yesterday. Mises’s thesis is that in a socialist economy rational economic calculation is impossible;
its attempts to allocate resources efficiently in the absence
of private ownership of the means of production must fail.
The East Bloc’s disastrous experience with socialism has
shown the world that Mises was correct all along.
In this article, Mises writes of full-blown socialism,
where the state is the sole owner of the means of production. Although made so long ago, his description reflects
very well the economic realities of the Soviet Union since
the late twenties, and of Central and Eastern Europe since
the late forties until, practically, today.
In the socialist economy that Mises described, consumption goods are freely demanded and exchanged by
individuals of different tastes. Money can exist, but only
within the limited sphere of the market for consumer
goods. In the sphere of production, however, there is no
private ownership of the means of production. They are
not exchanged, and as a consequence, it is impossible to
xi

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

establish prices that reflect actual conditions. If there are
no prices, there is no method of finding the most effective
combination of the factors of production.
Mises’s pathbreaking article led to a famous debate
on socialist calculation. Polish economist Oskar Lange
contested Mises’s position and tried to show that socialism can work by a “trial and error” method.1 In the Lange
model, the economy has a free market for consumption
goods. The production sphere is organized into enterprises
and branches, and there is a Central Planning Board. The
bosses of enterprises are required to establish production
plans in exactly the same way the private entrepreneurs
would do—in a way that minimizes costs and makes marginal cost equal to price. The Central Planning Board determines the rate of investment, the volume and structure
of public goods, and the prices of all inputs. The rate of
investment is established by equating the demand and
supply of capital goods. The Board raises the prices when
the demand is not satisfied and lowers them when supply
is too large.
Presuming for a moment that this would work, the
question arises: why is this method better than the real
market? For Lange, there were two advantages. First, income can be more equally distributed. Since there is no
capital income, people are paid according to their input
labor. (Some talented people receive additional income
which is a sort of “rent” on their particular skills.) Second, socialism allows for better planning of long-term
1
Oskar Lange, “On the Economic Theory of Socialism,”
Review of Economic Studies (1936–37).

xii

Ludwig von Mises

investment. Investment will not be directed by short-term
fluctuation of opinions about future opportunities, and
thus it would be less wasteful and more rational. Similar to
John Maynard Keynes and, later, Paul Samuelson, Lange
thought that although the free market may give proper signals concerning short-term production decisions, it does
not give long-term signals concerning investment.
Lange used neoclassical, not Marxist terminology. Although he was a socialist by conviction, he was fascinated
by the intellectual side of marginalist economics and by
the possibility of showing with this apparatus that Mises
was wrong. Lange thought that, theoretically, the possibility of calculation without an actual market was shown
by the Italian economist Enrico Barone in 1908.2 Barone
referred to a system of general equilibrium saying that if
the sets of equations could be solved, the partial equilibria
of producers and consumers could be established ex ante.
Barone’s point was, however, that such a possibility is practically impossible, so (similar to Mises) he supported the
view that socialism cannot work efficiently. Lange’s aim
was to show that both Mises and Barone were wrong (but
Mises to a larger degree) and that theoretically and practically, calculation was possible.
Lange thought he had finally solved the problems of socialist calculation that Mises had demonstrated in his essay
“Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth.”
And to this point Lange wrote in his article “On the Economic Theory of Socialism”:
2
Enrico Barone, “Ii zninisterio della produzione nello stato collettivista,” Giornale degli Economisti e Revista di Statistica 37 (1908).

xiii

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

Socialists have certainly good reason to be grateful to Professor Mises, the great advocatus diabol
of their cause. For it was his powerful challenge
that forced the socialists to recognize the importance of an adequate system of economic accounting to guide the allocation of resources in a
socialist economy. Even more, it was chiefly due
to Professor Mises’ challenge that many socialists became aware of the very existence of such a
problem. . . . [T]he merit of having caused the
socialists to approach this problem systematically
belongs entirely to Professor Mises.
Thus Lange suggested the following:
Both as an expression of recognition for the great
service rendered by him and as a memento of the
prime importance of sound economic accounting, a statue of Professor Mises ought to occupy
an honorable place in the great hall of the Ministry of Socialization or of the Central Planning
Board of the socialist state.
Lange’s theoretical views, as well as his conviction of
the practical applicability of a “shadow market” in the socialist economy, were, in turn, questioned by Friedrich A.
Hayek.3 Hayek thought that Lange had committed many
errors. In Lange’s version of socialism, an army of controllers would be needed to verify the calculations of the
heads of enterprises. But what would motivate the heads
of enterprises and branches? Would they be prevented
from cheating. Moreover, the results of these calculations
3
Friedrich A. Hayek, “Socialist Calculation: the Competitive
‘Solution’,” Economica, ns. vii, no. 26 (1940).

xiv

Ludwig von Mises

would have to be compared with additional, counterfactual calculations in order to see whether the bosses of
enterprises have chosen the best combination of factors of
production possible. All this would call for an enormous
bureaucratic state.
The practical side of socialism took its own course.
A communist economy as we know it was constructed
in the Soviet Union in the late twenties and early thirties
and then transplanted to Central and Eastern Europe after
World War II. For a time it seemed to have worked well,
at least from the point of view of the ruling bureaucracies,
who did not hesitate to use totalitarian measures and mass
terror.
There was no place for private ownership, nor for the
market. The only method of coordinating economic activity was government command and bureaucratic allocation.
The result was a prolonged crisis, marked by a stagnation
or decrease of production, by inflation, ecological disaster
(because of wasteful use of all types of resources—energy,
water, forests, etc.), by falling standards of living, and by
widespread public frustration and social pathology. This
crisis, coupled with political developments including the
rise of an organized opposition, brought about the revolutionary changes we witnessed in 1989.
In Eastern European countries, and in Poland in particular, there is now a strong desire to reintroduce private
property and the free market.
When it has been accomplished, perhaps Lange’s
suggestion should be taken up: a statue of Mises should
be erected in Poland—in tribute to his final intellectual
triumph. For his vision of a free society provides firm
xv

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

intellectual grounding for the emergence of a free and
prosperous Poland.
Jacek Kochanowicz
Professor of Economics
University of Warsaw, Poland
April 1990

xvi

Introduction
By Ludwig von Mises

T

here are many socialists who have never come to grips
in any way with the problems of economics, and who
have made no attempt at all to form for themselves
any clear conception of the conditions which determine
the character of human society. There are others, who have
probed deeply into the economic history of the past and
present, and striven, on this basis, to construct a theory of
economics of the “bourgeois” society. They have criticized
freely enough the economic structure of “free” society, but
have consistently neglected to apply to the economics of
the disputed socialist state the same caustic acumen, which
they have revealed elsewhere, not always with success. Economics, as such, figures all too sparsely in the glamorous
pictures painted by the Utopians. They invariably explain
how, in the cloud-cuckoo lands of their fancy, roast
pigeons will in some way fly into the mouths of the comrades, but they omit to show how this miracle is to take
place. Where they do in fact commence to be more explicit
in the domain of economics, they soon find themselves at
a loss—one remembers, for instance, Proudhon’s fantastic
dreams of an “exchange bank”—so that it is not difficult to
point out their logical fallacies. When Marxism solemnly
xvii

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

forbids its adherents to concern themselves with economic
problems beyond the expropriation of the expropriators, it
adopts no new principle, since the Utopians throughout
their descriptions have also neglected all economic considerations, and concentrated attention solely upon painting
lurid pictures of existing conditions and glowing pictures
of that golden age which is the natural consequence of the
New Dispensation.
Whether one regards the coming of socialism as an
unavoidable result of human evolution, or considers the
socialization of the means of production as the greatest
blessing or the worst disaster that can befall mankind, one
must at least concede, that investigation into the conditions of society organized upon a socialist basis is of value
as something more than “a good mental exercise, and a
means of promoting political clearness and consistency of
thought.”1 In an age in which we are approaching nearer
and nearer to socialism, and even, in a certain sense, are
dominated by it, research into the problems of the socialist state acquires added significance for the explanation
of what is going on around us. Previous analyses of the
exchange economy no longer suffice for a proper understanding of social phenomena in Germany and its eastern
neighbors today. Our task in this connection is to embrace
within a fairly wide range the elements of socialistic society. Attempts to achieve clarity on this subject need no
further justification.
1
Karl Kautsky, The Social Revolution and On the Morrow of the
Social Revolution (London: Twentieth Century Press, 1907), Part II,
p. 1.

xviii

1
The Distribution of
Consumption Goods in the
Socialist Commonwealth

U

nder socialism all the means of production are the
property of the community. It is the community
alone which can dispose of them and which determines their use in production. It goes without saying that
the community will only be in a position to employ its
powers of disposal through the setting up of a special body
for the purpose. The structure of this body and the question of how it will articulate and represent the communal
will is for us of subsidiary importance. One may assume
that this last will depend upon the choice of personnel,
and in cases where the power is not vested in a dictatorship, upon the majority vote of the members of the corporation.
The owner of production goods, who has manufactured consumption goods and thus becomes their owner,
now has the choice of either consuming them himself or
of having them consumed by others. But where the community becomes the owner of consumption goods, which
1

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

it has acquired in production, such a choice will no longer
obtain. It cannot itself consume; it has perforce to allow
others to do so. Who is to do the consuming and what
is to be consumed by each is the crux of the problem of
socialist distribution.
It is characteristic of socialism that the distribution of
consumption goods must be independent of the question
of production and of its economic conditions. It is irreconcilable with the nature of the communal ownership of
production goods that it should rely even for a part of its
distribution upon the economic imputation of the yield
to the particular factors of production. It is logically absurd to speak of the worker’s enjoying the “full yield” of
his work, and then to subject to a separate distribution
the shares of the material factors of production. For, as we
shall show, it lies in the very nature of socialist production that the shares of the particular factors of production
in the national dividend cannot be ascertained, and that
it is impossible in fact to gauge the relationship between
expenditure and income.
What basis will be chosen for the distribution of consumption goods among the individual comrades is for us
a consideration of more or less secondary importance.
Whether they will be apportioned according to individual
needs, so that he gets most who needs most, or whether
the superior man is to receive more than the inferior, or
whether a strictly equal distribution is envisaged as the
ideal, or whether service to the State is to be the criterion,
is immaterial to the fact that, in any event, the portions
will be meted out by the State.
2

Ludwig von Mises

Let us assume the simple proposition that distribution will be determined upon the principle that the State
treats all its members alike; it is not difficult to conceive
of a number of peculiarities such as age, sex, health, occupation, etc., according to which what each receives will
be graded. Each comrade receives a bundle of coupons,
redeemable within a certain period against a definite quantity of certain specified goods. And so he can eat several
times a day, find permanent lodgings, occasional amusements and a new suit every now and again. Whether such
provision for these needs is ample or not, will depend on
the productivity of social labor.
Moreover, it is not necessary that every man should
consume the whole of his portion. He may let some of
it perish without consuming it; he may give it away in
presents; he many even in so far as the nature of the goods
permit, hoard it for future use. He can, however, also exchange some of them. The beer tippler will gladly dispose
of non-alcoholic drinks allotted to him, if he can get more
beer in exchange, whilst the teetotaler will be ready to give
up his portion of drink if he can get other goods for it. The
art lover will be willing to dispose of his cinema tickets in
order the more often to hear good music; the Philistine
will be quite prepared to give up the tickets which admit
him to art exhibitions in return for opportunities for pleasure he more readily understands. They will all welcome
exchanges. But the material of these exchanges will always
be consumption goods. Production goods in a socialist
commonwealth are exclusively communal; they are an inalienable property of the community, and thus res extra
commercium.
3

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

The principle of exchange can thus operate freely in a
socialist state within the narrow limits permitted. It need
not always develop in the form of direct exchanges. The
same grounds which have always existed for the buildingup of indirect exchange will continue in a socialist state,
to place advantages in the way of those who indulge in
it. It follows that the socialist state will thus also afford
room for the use of a universal medium of exchange—
that is, of money. Its role will be fundamentally the same
in a socialist as in a competitive society; in both it serves
as the universal medium of exchange. Yet the significance
of money in a society where the means of production are
State controlled will be different from that which attaches
to it in one where they are privately owned. It will be,
in fact, incomparably narrower, since the material available for exchange will be narrower, inasmuch as it will be
confined to consumption goods. Moreover, just because
no production good will ever become the object of exchange, it will be impossible to determine its monetary
value. Money could never fill in a socialist state the role
it fills in a competitive society in determining the value of
production goods. Calculation in terms of money will here
be impossible.
The relationships which result from this system of exchange between comrades cannot be disregarded by those
responsible for the administration and distribution of
products. They must take these relationships as their basis,
when they seek to distribute goods per head in accordance
with their exchange value. If, for instance 1 cigar becomes
equal to 5 cigarettes, it will be impossible for the administration to fix the arbitrary value of 1 cigar = 3 cigarettes
4

Ludwig von Mises

as a basis for the equal distribution of cigars and cigarettes
respectively. If the tobacco coupons are not to be redeemed
uniformly for each individual, partly against cigars, partly against cigarettes, and if some receive only cigars and
others only cigarettes, either because that is their wish or
because the coupon office cannot do anything else at the
moment, the market conditions of exchange would then
have to be observed. Otherwise everybody getting cigarettes would suffer as against those getting cigars. For the
man who gets one cigar can exchange it for five cigarettes,
and he is only marked down with three cigarettes.
Variations in exchange relations in the dealings between comrades will therefore entail corresponding variations in the administrations’ estimates of the representative
character of the different consumption-goods. Every such
variation shows that a gap has appeared between the particular needs of comrades and their satisfactions because in
fact, some one commodity is more strongly desired than
another.
The administration will indeed take pains to bear this
point in mind also as regards production. Articles in greater demand will have to be produced in greater quantities
while production of those which are less demanded will
have to suffer a curtailment. Such control may be possible,
but one thing it will not be free to do; it must not leave it
to the individual comrade to ask the value of his tobacco
ticket either in cigars or cigarettes at will. If the comrade
were to have the right of choice, then it might well be
that the demand for cigars and cigarettes would exceed the
supply, or vice versa, that cigars or cigarettes pile up in the
distributing offices because no one will take them.
5

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

If one adopts the standpoint of the labor theory of
value, the problem freely admits of a simple solution. The
comrade is then marked up for every hour’s work put in,
and this entitles him to receive the product of one hour’s
labor, less the amount deducted for meeting such obligations of the community as a whole as maintenance of the
unfit, education, etc.
Taking the amount deducted for covering communal
expenses as one half of the labor product, each worker who
had worked a full hour would be entitled only to obtain
such amount of the product as really answered to half an
hour’s work. Accordingly, anybody who is in a position to
offer twice the labor time taken in manufacturing an article, could take it from the market and transfer to his own
use or consumption. For the clarification of our problem
it will be better to assume that the State does not in fact
deduct anything from the workers towards meeting its obligations, but instead imposes an income tax on its working members. In that way every hour of work put in would
carry with it the right of taking for oneself such amount of
goods as entailed an hour’s work.
Yet such a manner of regulating distribution would
be unworkable, since labor is not a uniform and homogeneous quantity. Between various types of labor there is
necessarily a qualitative difference, which leads to a different valuation according to the difference in the conditions
of demand for and supply of their products. For instance,
the supply of pictures cannot be increased ceteris paribus,
without damage to the quality of the product. Yet one cannot allow the laborer who had put in an hour of the most
simple type of labor to be entitled to the product of an
6

Ludwig von Mises

hour’s higher type of labor. Hence, it becomes utterly impossible in any socialist community to posit a connection
between the significance to the community of any type of
labor and the apportionment of the yield of the communal
process of production. The remuneration of labor cannot
but proceed upon an arbitrary basis; it cannot be based
upon the economic valuation of the yield as in a competitive state of society, where the means of production are in
private hands, since—as we have seen—any such valuation is impossible in a socialist community. Economic
realities impose clear limits to the community’s power of
fixing the remuneration of labor on an arbitrary basis: in
no circumstances can the sum expended on wages exceed
the income for any length of time.
Within these limits it can do as it will. It can rule
forthwith that all labor is to be reckoned of equal worth,
so that every hour of work, whatever its quality, entails the
same reward; it can equally well make a distinction in regard to the quality of work done. Yet in both cases it must
reserve the power to control the particular distribution of
the labor product. It will never be able to arrange that he
who has put in an hour’s labor shall also have the right
to consume the product of an hour’s labor, even leaving
aside the question of differences in the quality of the labor
and the products, and assuming moreover that it would
be possible to gauge the amount of labor represented by
any given article. For, over and above the actual labor, the
production of all economic goods entails also the cost of
materials. An article in which more raw material is used
can never be reckoned of equal value with one in which
less is used.
7

2
The Nature of
Economic Calculation

E

very man who, in the course of economic life, takes a
choice between the satisfaction of one need as against
another, eo ipso makes a judgment of value. Such
judgments of value at once include only the very satisfaction of the need itself; and from this they reflect back upon
the goods of a lower, and then further upon goods of a
higher order.1 As a rule, the man who knows his own mind
is in a position to value goods of a lower order. Under
simple conditions it is also possible for him without much
ado to form some judgment of the significance to him of
goods of a higher order. But where the state of affairs is
more involved and their interconnections not so easily discernible, subtler means must be employed to accomplish
a correct2 valuation of the means of production. It would
1
[By “lower order” Mises refers to those goods made for final
consumption, and by “higher order” those used in production.]
2
Using that term, of course, in the sense only of the valuating
subject, and not in an objective and universally applicable sense.

8

Ludwig von Mises

not be difficult for a farmer in economic isolation to come
by a distinction between the expansion of pasture-farming
and the development of activity in the hunting field. In
such a case the processes of production involved are relatively short and the expense and income entailed can be
easily gauged. But it is quite a different matter when the
choice lies between the utilization of a water-course for the
manufacture of electricity or the extension of a coal mine
or the drawing up of plans for the better employment of
the energies latent in raw coal. Here the roundabout processes of production are many and each is very lengthy;
here the conditions necessary for the success of the enterprises which are to be initiated are diverse, so that one
cannot apply merely vague valuations, but requires rather
more exact estimates and some judgment of the economic
issues actually involved.
Valuation can only take place in terms of units, yet
it is impossible that there should ever be a unit of subjective use value for goods. Marginal utility does not posit
any unit of value, since it is obvious that the value of two
units of a given stock is necessarily greater than, but less
than double, the value of a single unit. Judgments of value
do not measure; they merely establish grades and scales.3
Even Robinson Crusoe, when he has to make a decision
where no ready judgment of value appears and where he
has to construct one upon the basis of a more or less exact
estimate, cannot operate solely with subjective use value,
but must take into consideration the intersubstitutability
3
Franz Čuhel, Zur Lehre von den Bedürfnissen (Innsbruck:
Wagner’ssche Universität-Buchhandlung, 1907), pp. 198 f.

9

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

of goods on the basis of which he can then form his estimates. In such circumstances it will be impossible for him
to refer all things back to one unit. Rather will he, so far
as he can, refer all the elements which have to be taken
into account in forming his estimate to those economic
goods which can be apprehended by an obvious judgment
of value—that is to say, to goods of a lower order and to
pain-cost. That this is only possible in very simple conditions is obvious. In the case of more complicated and more
lengthy processes of production it will, plainly, not answer.
In an exchange economy the objective exchange value
of commodities enters as the unit of economic calculation.
This entails a threefold advantage. In the first place, it renders it possible to base the calculation upon the valuations
of all participants in trade. The subjective use value of each
is not immediately comparable as a purely individual phenomenon with the subjective use value of other men. It
only becomes so in exchange value, which arises out of the
interplay of the subjective valuations of all who take part
in exchange. But in that case calculation by exchange value
furnishes a control over the appropriate employment of
goods. Anyone who wishes to make calculations in regard
to a complicated process of production will immediately
notice whether he has worked more economically than
others or not; if he finds, from reference to the exchange
relations obtaining in the market, that he will not be able
to produce profitably, this shows that others understand
how to make a better use of the goods of higher order in
question. Lastly, calculation by exchange value makes it
possible to refer values back to a unit. For this purpose,
since goods are mutually substitutable in accordance with
10

Ludwig von Mises

the exchange relations obtaining in the market, any possible good can be chosen. In a monetary economy it is
money that is so chosen.
Monetary calculation has its limits. Money is no
yardstick of value, nor yet of price. Value is not indeed
measured in money, nor is price. They merely consist in
money. Money as an economic good is not of stable value
as has been naïvely, but wrongly, assumed in using it as a
“standard of deferred payments.” The exchange-relationship which obtains between money and goods is subjected
to constant, if (as a rule) not too violent, fluctuations originating not only from the side of other economic goods,
but also from the side of money. However, these fluctuations disturb value calculations only in the slightest degree,
since usually, in view of the ceaseless alternations in other
economic data—these calculations will refer only to comparatively short periods of time—periods in which “good”
money, at least normally, undergoes comparatively trivial
fluctuations in regard to its exchange relations. The inadequacy of the monetary calculation of value does not have
its mainspring in the fact that value is then calculated in
terms of a universal medium of exchange, namely money,
but rather in the fact that in this system it is exchange value and not subjective use value on which the calculation is
based. It can never obtain as a measure for the calculation
of those value determining elements which stand outside
the domain of exchange transactions. If, for example, a
man were to calculate the profitability of erecting a waterworks, he would not be able to include in his calculation
the beauty of the waterfall which the scheme might impair, except that he may pay attention to the diminution of
11

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

tourist traffic or similar changes, which may be valued in
terms of money. Yet these considerations might well prove
one of the factors in deciding whether or not the building
is to go up at all.
It is customary to term such elements “extra-economic.” This perhaps is appropriate; we are not concerned with
disputes over terminology; yet the considerations themselves can scarcely be termed irrational. In any place where
men regard as significant the beauty of a neighborhood or
of a building, the health, happiness and contentment of
mankind, the honor of individuals or nations, they are just
as much motive forces of rational conduct as are economic
factors in the proper sense of the word, even where they
are not substitutable against each other on the market and
therefore do not enter into exchange relationships.
That monetary calculation cannot embrace these
factors lies in its very nature; but for the purposes of our
everyday economic life this does not detract from the significance of monetary calculation. For all those ideal goods
are goods of a lower order, and can hence be embraced
straightway within the ambit of our judgment of values.
There is therefore no difficulty in taking them into account, even though they must remain outside the sphere
of monetary value. That they do not admit of such computation renders their consideration in the affairs of life
easier and not harder. Once we see clearly how highly we
value beauty, health, honor and pride, surely nothing can
prevent us from paying a corresponding regard to them. It
may seem painful to any sensitive spirit to have to balance
spiritual goods against material. But that is not the fault
of monetary calculation; it lies in the very nature of things
12

Ludwig von Mises

themselves. Even where judgments of value can be established directly without computation in value or in money,
the necessity of choosing between material and spiritual
satisfaction cannot be evaded. Robinson Crusoe and the
socialist state have an equal obligation to make the choice.
Anyone with a genuine sense of moral values experiences no hardship in deciding between honor and livelihood. He knows his plain duty. If a man cannot make
honor his bread, yet can he renounce his bread for honor’s
sake. Only they who prefer to be relieved of the agony
of this decision, because they cannot bring themselves to
renounce material comfort for the sake of spiritual advantage, see in the choice a profanation of true values.
Monetary calculation only has meaning within the
sphere of economic organization. It is a system whereby
the rules of economics may be applied in the disposition
of economic goods. Economic goods only have part in
this system in proportion to the extent to which they may
be exchanged for money. Any extension of the sphere of
monetary calculation causes misunderstanding. It cannot be regarded as constituting a kind of yardstick for the
valuation of goods, and cannot be so treated in historical
investigations into the development of social relationships;
it cannot be used as a criterion of national wealth and income, nor as a means of gauging the value of goods which
stand outside the sphere of exchange, as who should seek
to estimate the extent of human losses through emigrations or wars in terms of money?4 This is mere sciolistic
4
Cf. Friedrich von Wieser, Über den Ursprung und die Hauptgesetze des wirtschaftlichen Eertes (Vienna: A. Hölder, 1884), pp. 185 f.

13

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

tomfoolery, however much it may be indulged in by otherwise perspicacious economists.
Nevertheless within these limits, which in economic
life it never oversteps, monetary calculation fulfils all the
requirements of economic calculation. It affords us a guide
through the oppressive plenitude of economic potentialities. It enables us to extend to all goods of a higher order
the judgment of value, which is bound up with and clearly
evident in, the case of goods ready for consumption, or at
best of production goods of the lowest order. It renders
their value capable of computation and thereby gives us
the primary basis for all economic operations with goods
of a higher order. Without it, all production involving
processes stretching well back in time and all the longer
roundabout processes of capitalistic production would be
gropings in the dark.
There are two conditions governing the possibility of
calculating value in terms of money. Firstly, not only must
goods of a lower, but also those of a higher order, come
within the ambit of exchange, if they are to be included. If
they do not do so, exchange relationships would not arise.
True enough, the considerations which must obtain in the
case of Robinson Crusoe prepared, within the range of his
own hearth, to exchange, by production, labor and flour for
bread, are indistinguishable from those which obtain when
he is prepared to exchange bread for clothes in the open
market, and, therefore, it is to some extent true to say that
every economic action, inclu ding Robinson Crusoe’s own
14

Ludwig von Mises

production, can be termed exchange.5 Moreover, the mind
of one man alone—be it ever so cunning, is too weak to
grasp the importance of any single one among the countlessly many goods of a higher order. No single man can
ever master all the possibilities of production, innumerable
as they are, as to be in a position to make straightway evident judgments of value without the aid of some system of
computation. The distribution among a number of individuals of administrative control over economic goods in a
community of men who take part in the labor of producing them, and who are economically interested in them,
entails a kind of intellectual division of labor, which would
not be possible without some system of calculating production and without economy.
The second condition is that there exists in fact a
universally employed medium of exchange—namely,
money—which plays the same part as a medium in the
exchange of production goods also. If this were not the
case, it would not be possible to reduce all exchange-relationships to a common denominator.
Only under simple conditions can economics dispense with monetary calculation. Within the narrow
confines of household economy, for instance, where the
father can supervise the entire economic management, it
is possible to determine the significance of changes in the
processes of production, without such aids to the mind,
5
Cf. Mises, Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel (Munich
and Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1912), p. 16, with the references
there given. [See the English translation by H.E. Batson, The Theory
of Money and Credit (Indianapolis: Liberty Classics, 1980), p. 52.]

15

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

and yet with more or less of accuracy. In such a case the
process develops under a relatively limited use of capital.
Few of the capitalistic roundabout processes of production
are here introduced: what is manufactured is, as a rule,
consumption goods or at least such goods of a higher order
as stand very near to consumption-goods. The division of
labor is in its rudimentary stages: one and the same laborer
controls the labor of what is in effect, a complete process
of production of goods ready for consumption, from beginning to end. All this is different, however, in developed
communal production. The experiences of a remote and
bygone period of simple production do not provide any
sort of argument for establishing the possibility of an economic system without monetary calculation.
In the narrow confines of a closed household economy, it is possible throughout to review the process of
production from beginning to end, and to judge all the
time whether one or another mode of procedure yields
more consumable goods. This, however, is no longer possible in the incomparably more involved circumstances of
our own social economy. It will be evident, even in the
socialist society, that 1,000 hectolitres of wine are better
than 800, and it is not difficult to decide whether it desires
1,000 hectolitres of wine rather than 500 of oil. There is
no need for any system of calculation to establish this fact:
the deciding element is the will of the economic subjects
involved. But once this decision has been taken, the real
task of rational economic direction only commences, i.e.,
economically, to place the means at the service of the end.
That can only be done with some kind of economic calculation. The human mind cannot orientate itself properly
16

Ludwig von Mises

among the bewildering mass of intermediate products and
potentialities of production without such aid. It would
simply stand perplexed before the problems of management and location.6
It is an illusion to imagine that in a socialist state calculation in natura can take the place of monetary calculation.
Calculation in natura, in an economy without exchange,
can embrace consumption goods only; it completely fails
when it comes to dealing with goods of a higher order.
And as soon as one gives up the conception of a freely established monetary price for goods of a higher order, rational production becomes completely impossible. Every step
that takes us away from private ownership of the means of
production and from the use of money also takes us away
from rational economics.
It is easy to overlook this fact, considering that the
extent to which socialism is in evidence among us constitutes only a socialistic oasis in a society with monetary
exchange, which is still a free society to a certain degree. In
one sense we may agree with the socialists’ assertion which
is otherwise entirely untenable and advanced only as a
demagogic point, to the effect that the nationalization and
municipalization of enterprise is not really socialism, since
these concerns in their business organizations are so much
dependent upon the environing economic system with its
free commerce that they cannot be said to partake today
of the really essential nature of a socialist economy. In state
6
Friedrich von Gottl-Ottlilienfeld, Wirtschaft und Technik
(Grundriss der Sozialökonomik, Section II; Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr,
1914), p. 216.

17

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

and municipal undertakings technical improvements are
introduced because their effect in similar private enterprises, domestic or foreign, can be noticed, and because
those private industries which produce the materials for
these improvements give the impulse for their introduction. In these concerns the advantages of reorganization
can be established, because they operate within the sphere
of a society based upon private ownership of the means of
production and upon the system of monetary exchange,
being thus capable of computation and account. This state
of affairs, however, could not obtain in the case of socialist concerns operating in a purely socialistic environment.
Without economic calculation there can be no economy. Hence, in a socialist state wherein the pursuit of
economic calculation is impossible, there can be—in our
sense of the term—no economy whatsoever. In trivial and
secondary matters rational conduct might still be possible,
but in general it would be impossible to speak of rational
production any more. There would be no means of determining what was rational, and hence it is obvious that
production could never be directed by economic consider
ations. What this means is clear enough, apart from its
effects on the supply of commodities. Rational conduct
would be divorced from the very ground which is its proper domain. Would there, in fact, be any such thing as rational conduct at all, or, indeed, such a thing as rationality
and logic in thought itself? Historically, human rationality
is a development of economic life. Could it then obtain
when divorced therefrom?
For a time the remembrance of the experiences gained
in a competitive economy, which has obtained for some
18

Ludwig von Mises

thousands of years, may provide a check to the complete
collapse of the art of economy. The older methods of procedure might be retained not because of their rationality
but because they appear to be hallowed by tradition. Actually, they would meanwhile have become irrational, as no
longer comporting with the new conditions. Eventually,
through the general reconstruction of economic thought,
they will experience alterations which will render them
in fact uneconomic. The supply of goods will no longer
proceed anarchically of its own accord; that is true. All
transactions which serve the purpose of meeting requirements will be subject to the control of a supreme authority.
Yet in place of the economy of the “anarchic” method of
production, recourse will be had to the senseless output of
an absurd apparatus. The wheels will turn, but will run to
no effect.
One may anticipate the nature of the future socialist
society. There will be hundreds and thousands of factories
in operation. Very few of these will be producing wares
ready for use; in the majority of cases what will be manufactured will be unfinished goods and production goods.
All these concerns will be interrelated. Every good will go
through a whole series of stages before it is ready for use.
In the ceaseless toil and moil of this process, however, the
administration will be without any means of testing their
bearings. It will never be able to determine whether a given
good has not been kept for a superfluous length of time in
the necessary processes of production, or whether work
and material have not been wasted in its completion. How
will it be able to decide whether this or that method of production is the more profitable? At best it will only be able
19

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

to compare the quality and quantity of the consumable
end product produced, but will in the rarest cases be in a
position to compare the expenses entailed in production.
It will know, or think it knows, the ends to be achieved by
economic organization, and will have to regulate its activities accordingly, i.e., it will have to attain those ends with
the least expense. It will have to make its computations
with a view to finding the cheapest way. This computation will naturally have to be a value computation. It is
eminently clear, and requires no further proof, that it cannot be of a technical character, and that it cannot be based
upon the objective use value of goods and services.
Now, in the economic system of private ownership of
the means of production, the system of computation by
value is necessarily employed by each independent member of society. Everybody participates in its emergence in
a double way: on the one hand as a consumer and on the
other as a producer. As a consumer he establishes a scale
of valuation for goods ready for use in consumption. As
a producer he puts goods of a higher order into such use
as produces the greatest return. In this way all goods of a
higher order receive a position in the scale of valuations in
accordance with the immediate state of social conditions
of production and of social needs. Through the interplay
of these two processes of valuation, means will be afforded
for governing both consumption and production by the
economic principle throughout. Every graded system of
pricing proceeds from the fact that men always and ever
harmonized their own requirements with their estimation
of economic facts.
20

Ludwig von Mises

All this is necessarily absent from a socialist state. The
administration may know exactly what goods are most urgently needed. But in so doing, it has only found what is,
in fact, but one of the two necessary prerequisites for economic calculation. In the nature of the case it must, however, dispense with the other—the valuation of the means
of production. It may establish the value attained by the
totality of the means of production; this is obviously identical with that of all the needs thereby satisfied. It may also
be able to calculate the value of any means of production
by calculating the consequence of its withdrawal in relation to the satisfaction of needs. Yet it cannot reduce this
value to the uniform expression of a money price, as can
a competitive economy, wherein all prices can be referred
back to a common expression in terms of money. In a socialist commonwealth which, whilst it need not of necessity dispense with money altogether, yet finds it impossible
to use money as an expression of the price of the factors of
production (including labor), money can play no role in
economic calculation.7
Picture the building of a new railroad. Should it be
built at all, and if so, which out of a number of conceivable roads should be built? In a competitive and monetary
economy, this question would be answered by monetary
7
This fact is also recognized by Otto Neurath (Durch die Kriegswirtschaft zur Naturalwirtschaft [Munich: G.D.W. Callwey, 1919],
pp. 216 f.). He advances the view that every complete adminisrtative
economy is, in the final analysis, a natural economy. “Socialization,”
he says, “is thus the pursuit of natural economy.” Neurath merely
overlooks the insuperable difficulties that would have to develop
with economic calculation in the socialist commonwealth.

21

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

calculation. The new road will render less expensive the
transport of some goods, and it may be possible to calculate whether this reduction of expense transcends that
involved in the building and upkeep of the next line. That
can only be calculated in money. It is not possible to attain
the desired end merely by counterbalancing the various
physical expenses and physical savings. Where one cannot express hours of labor, iron, coal, all kinds of building material, machines and other things necessary for the
construction and upkeep of the railroad in a common unit
it is not possible to make calculations at all. The drawing
up of bills on an economic basis is only possible where
all the goods concerned can be referred back to money.
Admittedly, monetary calculation has its inconveniences
and serious defects, but we have certainly nothing better
to put in its place, and for the practical purposes of life
monetary calculation as it exists under a sound monetary
system always suffices. Were we to dispense with it, any
economic system of calculation would become absolutely
impossible.
The socialist society would know how to look after
itself. It would issue an edict and decide for or against the
projected building. Yet this decision would depend at best
upon vague estimates; it would never be based upon the
foundation of an exact calculation of value.
The static state can dispense with economic calculation.
For here the same events in economic life are ever recurring;
and if we assume that the first disposition of the static socialist economy follows on the basis of the final state of the
competitive economy, we might at all events conceive of a
socialist production system which is rationally controlled
22

Ludwig von Mises

from an economic point of view. But this is only conceptually possible. For the moment, we leave aside the fact that
a static state is impossible in real life, as our economic data
are forever changing, so that the static nature of economic
activity is only a theoretical assumption corresponding to
no real state of affairs, however necessary it may be for
our thinking and for the perfection of our knowledge of
economics. Even so, we must assume that the transition
to socialism must, as a consequence of the levelling out of
the differences in income and the resultant readjustments
in consumption, and therefore production, change all economic data in such a way that a connecting link with the
final state of affairs in the previously existing competitive
economy becomes impossible. But then we have the spectacle of a socialist economic order floundering in the ocean
of possible and conceivable economic combinations without the compass of economic calculation.
Thus in the socialist commonwealth every economic
change becomes an undertaking whose success can be neither appraised in advance nor later retrospectively determined. There is only groping in the dark. Socialism is the
abolition of rational economy.

23

3
Economic Calculation
in the Socialist Commonwealth

A

re we really dealing with the necessary consequences
of common ownership of the means of production?
Is there no way in which some kind of economic
calculation might be tied up with a socialist system?
In every great enterprise, each particular business or
branch of business is to some extent independent in its
accounting. It reckons the labor and material against each
other, and it is always possible for each individual group to
strike a particular balance and to approach the economic
results of its activities from an accounting point of view. We
can thus ascertain with what success each particular section
has labored, and accordingly draw conclusions about the
reorganization, curtailment, abandonment, or expansion
of existing groups and about the institution of new ones.
Admittedly, some mistakes are inevitable in such a calculation. They arise partly from the difficulties consequent
upon an allocation of general expenses. Yet other mistakes
arise from the necessity of calculating with what are not
24

Ludwig von Mises

from many points of view rigorously ascertainable data,
e.g., when in the ascertainment of the profitability of a
certain method of procedure we compute the amortization of the machines used on the assumption of a given
duration for their usefulness. Still, all such mistakes can be
confined within certain narrow limits, so that they do not
disturb the net result of the calculation. What remains of
uncertainty comes into the calculation of the uncertainty
of future conditions, which is an inevitable concomitant of
the dynamic nature of economic life.
It seems tempting to try to construct by analogy a separ ate estimation of the particular production groups in
the socialist state also. But it is quite impossible. For each
separate calculation of the particular branches of one and
the same enterprise depends exclusively on the fact that is
precisely in market dealings that market prices to be taken
as the bases of calculation are formed for all kinds of goods
and labor employed. Where there is no free market, there
is no pricing mechanism; without a pricing mechanism,
there is no economic calculation.
We might conceive of a situation, in which exchange
between particular branches of business is permitted, so as
to obtain the mechanism of exchange relations (prices) and
thus create a basis for economic calculation even in the socialist commonwealth. Within the framework of a uniform
economy knowing not private ownership of the means of
production, individual labor groups are constituted independent and authoritative disposers, which have indeed to
behave in accordance with the directions of the supreme
economic council, but which nevertheless assign each
other material goods and services only against a payment,
25

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

which would have to be made in the general medium of
exchange. It is roughly in this way that we conceive of the
organization of the socialist running of business when we
nowadays talk of complete socialization and the like. But
we have still not come to the crucial point. Exchange relations between production goods can only be established
on the basis of private ownership of the means of production. When the “coal syndicate “provides the “iron syndicate “with coal, no price can be formed, except when both
syndicates are the owners of the means of production employed in their business. This would not be socialization
but workers’ capitalism and syndicalism.
The matter is indeed very simple for those socialist
theorists who rely on the labor theory of value.
As soon as society takes possession of the means
of production and applies them to production in
their directly socialised form, each individual’s labour, however different its specific utility may be,
becomes a priori and directly social labour. The
amount of social labour invested in a product need
not then be established indirectly; daily experience
immediately tells us how much is necessary on an
average. Society can simply calculate how many
hours of labour are invested in a steam engine, a
quarter of last harvest’s wheat, and a 100 yards of
linen of given quality. . . . To be sure, society will
also have to know how much labour is needed
to produce any consumption-good. It will have
to arrange its production plan according to its
means of production, to which labour especially belongs. The utility yielded by the various consumption-goods, weighted against each
26

Ludwig von Mises

other and against the amount of labour required
to produce them, will ultimately determine the
plan. People will make everything simple without
the mediation of the notorious “value.”8
Here it is not our task once more to advance critical
objections against the labor theory of value. In this connection they can only interest us in so far as they are relevant to an assessment of the applicability of labor in the
value computations of a socialist community.
On a first impression calculation in terms of labor
also takes into consideration the natural non-human conditions of production. The law of diminishing returns is
already allowed for in the concept of socially necessary
average labor time to the extent that its operation is due
to the variety of the natural conditions of production. If
the demand for a commodity increases and worse natural
resources must be exploited, then the average socially necessary labor time required for the production of a unit increases too. If more favorable natural resources are discovered, the amount of socially necessary labor diminishes.9
The consideration of the natural condition of production
suffices only in so far as it is reflected in the amount of labor
socially necessary. But it is in this respect that valuation in
terms of labor fails. It leaves the employment of material
factors of production out of account. Let the amount of
8
Friedrich Engels, Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung des Wissenschaft, 7th ed., pp. 335 f. [Translated by Emile Burns as Herr
Eugen Dühring’s Revolution in Science—Anti-Düring (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1943).]
9
Karl Marx, Capital, translated by Eden and Cedar Paul (London: Allen & Unwin, 1928), p. 9.

27

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

socially necessary labor time required for the production of
each of the commodities P and Q be 10 hours. Further, in
addition to labor the production of both P and Q requires
the raw material a, a unit of which is produced by an hour’s
socially necessary labor; 2 units of a and 8 hours’ labor are
used in the production of P, and one unit of a and 9 hours’
labor in the production of Q. In terms of labor P and Q
are equivalent, but in value terms P is more valuable than
Q. The former is false, and only the latter corresponds to
the nature and purpose of calculation. True, this surplus,
by which according to value calculation P is more valuable than Q, this material sub-stratum “is given by nature
without any addition from man.”10 Still, the fact that it is
only present in such quantities that it becomes an object
of economizing, must be taken into account in some form
or other in value calculation.
The second defect in calculation in terms of labor is
the ignoring of the different qualities of labor. To Marx all
human labor is economically of the same kind, as it is always “the productive expenditure of human brain, brawn,
nerve and hand.”11
Skilled labour counts only as intensified, or rather
multiplied, simple labour, so that a smaller quantity of skilled labour is equal to a larger quantity
of simple labour. Experience shows that skilled
labour can always be reduced in this way to the
terms of simple labour. No matter that a commodity be the product of the most highly skilled
10

Ibid., p. 12.
Ibid., p. 13 et seq.

11

28

Ludwig von Mises

labour, its value can be equated with that of the
product of simple labour, so that it represents
merely a definite amount of simple labour.
Böhm-Bawerk is not far wrong when he calls this argument “a theoretical juggle of almost stupefying naïveté.”12
To judge Marx’s view we need not ask if it is possible to
discover a single uniform physiological measure of all human labor, whether it be physical or “mental.” For it is certain that there exist among men varying degrees of capacity and dexterity, which cause the products and services of
labor to have varying qualities. What must be conclusive
in deciding the question whether reckoning in terms of
labor is applicable or not, is whether it is or is not possible
to bring different kinds of labor under a common denominator without the mediation of the economic subject’s
valuation of their products. The proof Marx attempts to
give is not successful. Experience indeed shows that goods
are consumed under exchange relations without regard of
the fact of their being produced by simple or complex labor. But this would only be a proof that given amounts of
simple labor are directly made equal to given amounts of
complex labor, if it were shown that labor is their source
of exchange value. This not only is not demonstrated, but
is what Marx is trying to demonstrate by means of these
very arguments.
12
Cf. Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, Capital and Interest, translated
by William Smart (London and New York: Macmillan, 1890), p.
384. [See the English translation by George Huncke and Hans F.
Sennholz (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1959), p. 299,
where the phrase reads “a bit of legerdemain in the theorizing line
that is astounding in its naïveté.”]

29

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

No more is it a proof of this homogeneity that rates of
substitution between simple and complex labor are manifested in the wage rate in an exchange economy—a fact to
which Marx does not allude in this context. This equalizing process is a result of market transactions and not its
antecedent. Calculation in terms of labor would have to
set up an arbitrary proportion for the substitution of complex by simple labor, which excludes its employment for
purposes of economic administration.
It was long supposed that the labor theory of value
was indispensable to socialism, so that the demand for the
nationalization of the means of production should have an
ethical basis. Today we know this for the error it is. Although
the majority of socialist supporters have thus employed this
misconception, and although Marx, however much he fundamentally took another point of view, was not altogether
free from it, it is clear that the political call for the introduction of socialized production neither requires nor can
obtain the support of the labor theory of value on the one
hand, and that on the other those people holding different
views on the nature and origin of economic value can be
socialist according to their sentiments. Yet the labor theory
of value is inherently necessary for the supporters of socialist
production in a sense other than that usually intended. In
the main socialist production might only appear rationally
realizable, if it provided an objectively recognizable unit of
value, which would permit of economic calculation in an
economy where neither money nor exchange were present.
And only labor can conceivably be considered as such.

30

4
Responsibility and Initiative
in Communal Concerns

T

he problem of responsibility and initiative in socialist enterprises is closely connected with that of economic calculation. It is now universally agreed that
the exclusion of free initiative and individual responsibility, on which the successes of private enterprise depend,
constitutes the most serious menace to socialist economic
organization.13
The majority of socialists silently pass this problem by.
Others believe they can answer it with an allusion to the
directors of companies; in spite of the fact that they are not
the owners of the means of production, enterprises under
their control have flourished. If society, instead of company
shareholders, becomes the owner of the means of production, nothing will have altered. The directors would not
work less satisfactorily for society than for shareholders.

13
Cf. Vorläufiger Bericht der Sozialisierungskommission über die
Fragse der Sozialisierung des Kohlenbergbaues, concluded 15th February, 1919 (Berlin, 1919), p. 13.

31

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

We must distinguish between two groups of jointstock companies and similar concerns. In the first group,
consisting for the large part of smaller companies, a few
individuals unite in a common enterprise in the legal form
of a company. They are often the heirs of the founders
of the company, or often previous competitors who have
amalgamated. Here the actual control and management
of business is in the hands of the shareholders themselves
or at least of some of the shareholders, who do business
in their own interest; or in that of closely related shareholders such as wives, minors, etc. The directors in their
capacity as members of the board of management or of
the board of control, and sometimes also in an attenuated
legal capacity, themselves exercise the decisive influence in
the conduct of affairs. Nor is this affected by the circumstance that sometimes part of the share-capital is held by a
financial consortium or bank. Here in fact the company is
only differentiated from the public commercial company
by its legal form.
The situation is quite different in the case of largescale companies, where only a fraction of the shareholders,
i.e., the big shareholders, participate in the actual control
of the enterprise. And these usually have the same interest
in the firm’s prosperity as any property holder. Still, it may
well be that they have interests other than those of the vast
majority of small shareholders, who are excluded from the
management even if they own the larger part of the sharecapital. Severe collisions may occur, when the firm’s business is so handled on behalf of the directors that the shareholders are injured. But be that as it may, it is clear that the
real holders of power in companies run the business in their
32

Ludwig von Mises

own interest, whether it coincides with that of the shareholders or not. In the long run it will generally be to the
advantage of the solid company administrator, who is not
merely bent on making a transient profit, to represent the
shareholders’ interests only in every case and to avoid manipulations which might damage them. This holds good
in the first instance for banks and financial groups, which
should not trifle at the public’s expense with the credit
they enjoy. Thus it is not merely on the prescriptiveness
of ethical motives that the success of companies depends.
The situation is completely transformed when an
undertaking is nationalized. The motive force disappears
with the exclusion of the material interests of private individuals, and if State and municipal enterprises thrive at
all, they owe it to the taking over of “management” from
private enterprise, or to the fact that they are ever driven to
reforms and innovations by the business men from whom
they purchase their instruments of production and raw
material.
Since we are in a position to survey decades of State
and socialist endeavor, it is now generally recognized that
there is no internal pressure to reform and improvement of
production in socialist undertakings, that they cannot be
adjusted to the changing conditions of demand, and that
in a word they are a dead limb in the economic organism.
All attempts to breathe life into them have so far been in
vain. It was supposed that a reform in the system of remuneration might achieve the desired end. If the managers of these enterprises were interested in the yield, it was
thought they would be in a position comparable to that of
the manager of large-scale companies. This is a fatal error.
33

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

The managers of large-scale companies are bound up with
the interests of the businesses they administer in an entirely different way from what could be the case in public
concerns. They are either already owners of a not inconsiderable fraction of the share capital, or hope to become so in
due course. Further, they are in a position to obtain profits by stock exchange speculation in the company’s shares.
They have the prospect of bequeathing their positions to,
or at least securing part of their influence for, their heirs.
The type to which the success of joint-stock companies
is to be attributed, is not that of a complacently prosperous managing director resembling the civil servant in his
outlook and experience; rather it is precisely the manager,
promoter, and man of affairs, who is himself interested as
a shareholder, whom it is the aim of all nationalization and
municipalization to exclude.
It is not generally legitimate to appeal in a socialist
context to such arguments in order to ensure the success
of an economic order built on socialist foundations. All
socialist systems, including that of Karl Marx, and his orthodox supporters, proceed from the assumption that in a
socialist society a conflict between the interests of the particular and general could not possibly arise. Everybody will
act in his own interest in giving of his best because he participates in the product of all economic activity. The obvious objection that the individual is very little concerned
whether he himself is diligent and enthusiastic, and that
it is of greater moment to him that everybody else should
be, is either completely ignored or is insufficiently dealt
with by them. They believe they can construct a socialist
commonwealth on the basis of the Categorical Imperative
34

Ludwig von Mises

alone. How lightly it is their wont to proceed in this way
is best shown by Kautsky when he says, “If socialism is a
social necessity, then it would be human nature and not
socialism which would have to readjust itself, if ever the
two clashed.”14 This is nothing but sheer Utopianism.
But even if we for the moment grant that these Utopian expectations can actually be realized, that each individual in a socialist society will exert himself with the same
zeal as he does today in a society where he is subjected
to the pressure of free competition, there still remains the
problem of measuring the result of economic activity in
a socialist commonwealth which does not permit of any
economic calculation. We cannot act economically if we
are not in a position to understand economizing.
A popular slogan affirms that if we think less bureaucratically and more commercially in communal enterprises, they will work just as well as private enterprises. The
leading positions must be occupied by merchants, and
then income will grow apace. Unfortunately “commercial-mindedness” is not something external, which can be
arbitrarily transferred. A merchant’s qualities are not the
property of a person depending on inborn aptitude, nor
are they acquired by studies in a commercial school or by
working in a commercial house, or even by having been a
business man oneself for some period of time. The entrepreneur’s commercial attitude and activity arises from his
position in the economic process and is lost with its dis14
Cf. Karl Kautsky, Preface to “Atlanticus” [Gustav Jaeckh],
Produktion und Konsum im Sozialstaat (Stuttgart: J.H.W. Dietz,
1898), p. 14.

35

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

appearance. When a successful business man is appointed
the manager of a public enterprise, he may still bring with
him certain experiences from his previous occupation, and
be able to turn them to good account in a routine fashion
for some time. Still, with his entry into communal activity he ceases to be a merchant and becomes as much a
bureaucrat as any other placeman in the public employ.
It is not a knowledge of bookkeeping, of business organization, or of the style of commercial correspondence, or
even a dispensation from a commercial high school, which
makes the merchant, but his characteristic position in the
production process, which allows of the identification of
the firm’s and his own interests. It is no solution of the
problem when Otto Bauer in his most recently published
work proposes that the directors of the National Central
Bank, on whom leadership in the economic process will be
conferred, should be nominated by a Collegium, to which
representatives of the teaching staff of the commercial high
schools would also belong.15 Like Plato’s philosophers, the
directors so appointed may well be the wisest and best of
their kind, but they cannot be merchants in their posts as
leaders of a socialist society, even if they should have been
previously.
It is a general complaint that the administration of
public undertakings lacks initiative. It is believed that this
might be remedied by changes in organization. This also is
a grievous mistake. The management of a socialist concern
cannot entirely be placed in the hands of a single individual,
15
Cf. Otto Bauer, Der Weg zum Sozialismus (Vienna: Ignaz
Brand, 1919), p. 25.

36

Ludwig von Mises

because there must always be the suspicion that he will
permit errors inflicting heavy damages on the community.
But if the important conclusions are made dependent on
the votes of committees, or on the consent of the relevant
government offices, then limitations are imposed on the
individual’s initiative. Committees are rarely inclined to
introduce bold innovations. The lack of free initiative in
public business rests not on an absence of organization, it
is inherent in the nature of the business itself. One cannot
transfer free disposal of the factors of production to an
employee, however high his rank, and this becomes even
less possible, the more strongly he is materially interested
in the successful performance of his duties; for in practice
the propertyless manager can only be held morally responsible for losses incurred. And so ethical losses are juxtaposed with opportunities for material gain. The property
owner on the other hand himself bears responsibility, as
he himself must primarily feel the loss arising from unwisely conducted business. It is precisely in this that there
is a characteristic difference between liberal and socialist
production.

37

5
The Most Recent Socialist
Doctrines and the Problem
of Economic Calculation

S

ince recent events helped socialist parties to obtain
power in Russia, Hungary, Germany and Austria,
and have thus made the execution of a socialist
nationalization program a topical issue,16 Marxist writers
have themselves begun to deal more closely with the problems of the regulation of the socialist commonwealth. But
even now they still cautiously avoid the crucial question,
leaving it to be tackled by the despised “Utopians.” They
themselves prefer to confine their attention to what is to
be done in the immediate future; they are forever drawing
up programs of the path to Socialism and not of Socialism
itself. The only possible conclusion from all these writings
is that they are not even conscious of the larger problem of
economic calculation in a socialist society.

16

[The reader will remember that Mises is writing in 1920.]
38

Ludwig von Mises

To Otto Bauer the nationalization of the banks appears the final and decisive step in the carrying through
of the socialist nationalization program. If all banks are
nationalized and amalgamated into a single central bank,
then its administrative board becomes “the supreme economic authority, the chief administrative organ of the
whole economy. Only by nationalization of the banks does
society obtain the power to regulate its labor according to
a plan, and to distribute its resources rationally among the
various branches of production, so as to adapt them to
the nation’s needs.”17 Bauer is not discussing the monetary
arrangements which will prevail in the socialist commonwealth after the completion of the nationalization of the
banks. Like other Marxists he is trying to show how simply and obviously the future socialist order of society will
evolve from the conditions prevailing in a developed capitalist economy. “It suffices to transfer to the nation’s representatives the power now exercised by bank shareholders
through the Administrative Boards they elect,”18 in order
to socialize the banks and thus to lay the last brick on the
edifice of socialism. Bauer leaves his readers completely ignorant of the fact that the nature of the banks is entirely
changed in the process of nationalization and amalgamation into one central bank. Once the banks merge into a
single bank, their essence is wholly transformed; they are
then in a position to issue credit without any limitation.19
17

Cf. Otto Bauer, Der Weg zum Sozialismus (Vienna: Ignaz
Brand, 1919), p. 26 f.
18
Ibid. p. 25.
19
Cf. Ludwig von Mises, Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel (Munich and Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1912), pp.
39

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

In this fashion the monetary system as we know it today
disappears of itself. When in addition the single central
bank is nationalized in a society, which is otherwise already
completely socialized, market dealings disappear and all
exchange transactions are abolished. At the same time the
Bank ceases to be a bank, its specific functions are extinguished, for there is no longer any place for it in such a society. It may be that the name “Bank” is retained, that the
Supreme Economic Council of the socialist community is
called the Board of Directors of the Bank, and that they
hold their meetings in a building formerly occupied by a
bank. But it is no longer a bank, it fulfils none of those
functions which a bank fulfils in an economic system resting on the private ownership of the means of production
and the use of a general medium of exchange—money.
It no longer distributes any credit, for a socialist society
makes credit of necessity impossible. Bauer himself does
not tell us what a bank is, but he begins his chapter on the
nationalization of the banks with the sentence: “All disposable capital flows into a common pool in the banks.”20 As a
Marxist must he not raise the question of what the banks’
activities will be after the abolition of capitalism?
All other writers who have grappled with the problems of the organization of the socialist commonwealth
are guilty of similar confusions. They do not realize
that the bases of economic calculation are removed by
474 ff. [See the English translation by H.E. Batson, The Theory of
Money and Credit (Indianapolis: Liberty Classics, 1980), [Compare
p. 411 of the 1980 English edition.]
20
Cf. Bauer, Der Weg zum Sozialismus, p. 24 f.
40

Ludwig von Mises

the exclusion of exchange and the pricing mechanism,
and that something must be substituted in its place, if
all economy is not to be abolished and a hopeless chaos
is not to result. People believe that socialist institutions
might evolve without further ado from those of a capitalist economy. This is not at all the case. And it becomes all
the more grotesque when we talk of banks, banks management, etc. in a socialist commonwealth.
Reference to the conditions that have developed in
Russia and Hungary under Soviet rule proves nothing.
What we have there is nothing but a picture of the destruction of an existing order of social production, for which a
closed peasant household economy has been substituted.
All branches of production depending on social division
of labor are in a state of entire dissolution. What is happening under the rule of Lenin and Trotsky is merely destruction and annihilation. Whether, as the liberals21 hold,
socialism must inevitably draw these consequences in its
train, or whether, as the socialists retort, this is only a result of the fact that the Soviet Republic is attacked from
without, is a question of no interest to us in this context.
All that has to be established is the fact that the Soviet
socialist commonwealth has not even begun to discuss the
problem of economic calculation, nor has it any cause to
do so. For where things are still produced for the market in
Soviet Russia in spite of governmental prohibitions, they
21
[Mises is using the term “liberal” here in its nineteenth-century European sense, meaning “classical liberal” or libertarian. On
liberalism see Mises’s Liberalism: In the Classical Tradition, translated
by Ralph Raico (Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1985).]

41

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

are valued in terms of money, for there exists to that extent private ownership of the means of production, and
goods are sold against money. Even the Government cannot deny the necessity, which it confirms by increasing the
amount of money in circulation, of retaining a monetary
system for at least the transition period.
That the essence of the problem to be faced has not
yet come to light in Soviet Russia, Lenin’s statements in
his essay on Die nächsten Aufgaben der Sowjetmacht best
show. In the dictator’s deliberations there ever recurs the
thought that the immediate and most pressing task of
Russian communism is “the organization of bookkeeping and control of those concerns, in which the capitalists
have already been expropriated, and of all other economic
concerns.”22 Even so Lenin is far from realizing that an entirely new problem is here involved which it is impossible
to solve with the conceptual instruments of “bourgeois”
culture. Like a real politician, he does not bother with issues beyond his nose. He still finds himself surrounded by
monetary transactions, and does not notice that with progressive socialization money also necessarily loses its function as the medium of exchange in general use, to the extent that private property and with it exchange disappear.
The implication of Lenin’s reflections is that he would like
to re-introduce into Soviet business “bourgeois” bookkeeping carried on on a monetary basis. Therefore he also
22
Cf. V.I. Lenin, Die nächsten Aufgaben der Sowjetmacht (Berlin: Wilmersdorf, 1919), pp. 12 f., 22 ff. [English translation, The
Soviets at Work.—This edition.]

42

Ludwig von Mises

desires to restore “bourgeois experts” to a state of grace.23
For the rest Lenin is as little aware as Bauer of the fact that
in a socialist commonwealth the functions of the bank are
unthinkable in their existing sense. He wishes to go farther
with the “nationalization of the banks” and to proceed”
to a transformation of the banks into the nodal point of
social bookkeeping under socialism.”24
Lenin’s ideas on the socialist economic system, to
which he is striving to lead his people, are generally obscure.
“The socialist state,” he says “can only arise as
a net of producing and consuming communes,
which conscientiously record their production
and consumption, go about their labour economically, uninterruptedly raise their labour productivity and thus attain the possibility of lowering the working day to seven or six hours or even
lower.”25 . . . . “Every factor, every village appears
as a production and consumption commune having the right and obligation to apply the general
Soviet legislation in its own way (‘in its own way’
not in the sense of its violation but in the sense
of the variety of its forms of realisation), and to
solve in its own way the problems of calculating
the production and distribution of products.”26
23

Ibid., pp. 15.
Ibid., pp. 21 and 26. Compare also Bukharin, Das Programm
der Kommunisten (Zürich: no pub., 1918), pp. 27 ff.
25
Lenin, Die nächsten Aufgaben der Sowjetmacht, pp. 24 f.
26
Ibid., pp. 32.
24

43

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

“The chief communes must and will serve the most
backward ones as educators, teachers, and stimulating
leaders.” The successes of the chief communes must be
broadcast in all their details in order to provide a good
example. The communes “showing good business results”
should be immediately rewarded “by a curtailment of the
working day and with an increase in wages, and by allowing more attention to be paid to cultural and aesthetic
goods and values.”27
We can infer that Lenin’s ideal is a state of society in
which the means of production are not the property of a
few districts, municipalities, or even of the workers in the
concern, but of the whole community. His ideal is socialist
and not syndicalist. This need not be specially stressed for
a Marxist such as Lenin. It is not extraordinary of Lenin
the theorist, but of Lenin the statesman, who is the leader
of the syndicalist and small-holding peasant Russian revolution. However, at the moment we are engaged with the
writer Lenin and may consider his ideals separately, without letting ourselves be disturbed by the picture of sober
reality. According to Lenin the theorist, every large agricultural and industrial concern is a member of the great
commonwealth of labor. Those who are active in this
commonwealth have the right of self-government; they
exercise a profound influence on the direction of production and again on the distribution of the goods they are
assigned for consumption. Still labor is the property of the
whole society, and as its product belongs to society also, it
therefore disposes of its distribution. How, we must now
27

Ibid., p. 33.
44

Ludwig von Mises

ask, is calculation in the economy carried on in a socialist
commonwealth which is so organized? Lenin gives us a
most inadequate answer by referring us back to statistics.
We must
bring statistics to the masses, make it popular, so
that the active population will gradually learn by
themselves to understand and realize how much
and what kind of work must be done, how much
and what kind of recreation should be taken, so
that the comparison of the economy’s industrial
results in the case of individual communes becomes the object of general interest and education.28
From these scanty allusions it is impossible to infer
what Lenin understands by statistics and whether he is
thinking of monetary or in natura computation. In any
case, we must refer back to what we have said about the
impossibility of learning the money prices of productiongoods in a socialist commonwealth and about the difficulties standing in the way of in natura valuation.29 Statistics
would only be applicable to economic calculation if it
could go beyond the in natura calculation, whose ill-suitedness for this purpose we have demonstrated. It is naturally impossible where no exchange relations are formed
between goods in the process of trade.

28

Ibid.
Neurath, too, imputes great importance to statistics for the
setting up of the socialist economic plan. Otto Neurath (Durch die
Kriegswirtschaft zur Naturalwirtschaft [Munich: G.D.W. Callwey,
1919], pp. 212 et seq.).
29

45

Conclusion

I

t must follow from what we have been able to establish in our previous arguments that the protagonists of
a socialist system of production claim preference for it
on the ground of greater rationality as against an economy
so constituted as to depend on private ownership of the
means of production. We have no need to consider this
opinion within the framework of the present essay, in so
far as it falls back on the assertion that rational economic
activity necessarily cannot be perfect, because certain
forces are operative which hinder its pursuance. In this
connection we may only pay attention to the economic
and technical reason for this opinion. There hovers before
the holders of this tenet a muddled conception of technical rationality, which stands in antithesis to economic
rationality, on which also they are not very clear. They are
wont to overlook the fact that “all technical rationality of
production is identical with a low level of specific expenditure in the processes of production.”30 They overlook
30
Friedrich von Gottl-Ottlilienfeld, Wirtschaft und technik
(Grundriss der Sozialökonomik, Section II; Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr,
1914), p. 220.

46

Ludwig von Mises

the fact that technical calculation is not enough to realize
the “degree of general and teleological expediency”31 of an
event; that it can only grade individual events according to
their significance; but that it can never guide us in those
judgments which are demanded by the economic complex
as a whole. Only because of the fact that technical considerations can be based on profitability can we overcome
the difficulty arising from the complexity of the relations
between the mighty system of present-day production on
the one hand and demand and the efficiency of enterprises and economic units on the other; and can we gain
the complete picture of the situation in its totality, which
rational economic activity requires.32
These theories are dominated by a confused conception of the primacy of objective use value. In fact, so far as
economic administration is concerned, objective use value
can only acquire significance for the economy through the
influence it derives from subjective use value on the formation of the exchange relations of economic goods. A second confused idea is inexplicably involved—the observer’s
personal judgment of the utility of goods as opposed to the
judgments of the people participating in economic transactions. If anyone finds it “irrational” to spend as much as
is expended in society on smoking, drinking, and similar
enjoyments, then doubtless he is right from the point of
view of his own personal scale of values. But in so judging,
he is ignoring the fact that economy is a means, and that,
without prejudice to the rational considerations influencing
31

Ibid., p. 219.
Ibid., p. 225.

32

47

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

its pattern, the scale of ultimate ends is a matter for conation and not for cognition.
The knowledge of the fact that rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth cannot, of
course, be used as an argument either for or against socialism. Whoever is prepared himself to enter upon socialism
on ethical grounds on the supposition that the provision
of goods of a lower order for human beings under a system of common ownership of the means of production
is diminished, or whoever is guided by ascetic ideals in
his desire for socialism, will not allow himself to be influenced in his endeavors by what we have said. Still less will
those “culture” socialists be deterred who, like Muckle, expect from socialism primarily “the dissolution of the most
frightful of all barbarisms—capitalist rationality.”33 But he
who expects a rational economic system from socialism
will be forced to re-examine his views

33
Friedrich Muckle, Das Kulturideal des Sozialismus (Munich
and Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1919), p. 213. On the other
hand, Muckle demands the “highest degree of rationalisation of
economic life in order to curtail hours of labor, and to permit man
to withdraw to an island where he can listen to the melody of his
being.”

48

Postscript
Why a Socialist Economy
is “Impossible”
Mises’s Thesis

I

n “Economic Calculation in a Socialist Commonwealth,” Ludwig von Mises demonstrates, once and forever, that, under socialist central planning, there are no
means of economic calculation and that, therefore, socialist economy itself is “impossible” (“unmöglich”)—not just
inefficient or less innovative or conducted without benefit
of decentralized knowledge, but really and truly and literally impossible.
At the same time, he establishes that the necessary and
sufficient conditions of the existence and evolution of human society is liberty, property, and sound money: the liberty of each individual to produce and exchange according
to independently formed value judgments and price appraisements; unrestricted private ownership of all types and
orders of producers’ goods as well as of consumers’ goods;
and the existence of a universal medium of exchange whose
value is not subject to large or unforeseeable variations.
49

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

Abolish all, or even one, of these institutions and
human society disintegrates amid a congeries of isolated
household economies and predatory tribes. But not only
does abolition of private ownership of the means of production by a world embracing socialist state render human
social existence impossible: Mises’s analysis also implies
that socialism destroys the praxeological significance of
time and nullifies humanity’s uniquely teleological contribution to the universe.
Because Mises’s critique of socialism has been the subject of significant misinterpretation by his followers as well
as his opponents, his argument, as it is presented in this
article, should be restated.

The Calculation Argument
(1) Mises’s pathbreaking and central insight is that
monetary calculation is the indispensable mental tool for
choosing the optimum among the vast array of intricatelyrelated production plans that are available for employing
the factors of production within the framework of the social division of labor. Without recourse to calculating and
comparing the benefits and costs of production using the
structure of monetary prices determined at each moment
on the market, the human mind is only capable of surveying, evaluating, and directing production processes whose
scope is drastically restricted to the compass of the primitive household economy.
The practically unlimited number of alternative plans
for allocating the factors of production and the overwhelming complexities of their interrelationships stem from two
50

Ludwig von Mises

related facts about our world. First, our world is endowed
with a wide variety of relatively “nonspecific” resources,
which to a greater or lesser degree are substitutable for
one another over a broad range of production processes.
Second, since human action itself implies the ineradicable
scarcity of time as well as of resources, there always exists
an almost inexhaustible opportunity to accumulate capital
and lengthen the economy’s structure of production, thus
multiplying beyond number the technical possibilities for
combining the factors of production.
Given, therefore, the infinitude of the relationships of
complementarity and substitutability simultaneously subsisting among the various types of productive resources, a
single human mind—even if it were miraculously endowed
with complete and accurate knowledge of the quantities
and qualities of the available factors of production, of the
latest techniques for combining and transforming these
factors into consumer goods, and of the set of all individuals’ value rankings of consumer goods—would be utterly
incapable of determining the optimal pattern of resource
allocation or even if a particular plan was ludicrously and
destructively uneconomic. Not only would this perfectly
knowledgeable person be unable to devise a rational solution of the problem, he or she would be unable to even
achieve a full intellectual “survey” of the problem in all its
complexity.
Thus, as Mises (p. 15) says,
the mind of one man alone—be it never so cunning, is too weak to grasp the importance of any
single one among the countlessly many goods of
a higher order. No single man can ever master
51

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

all the possibilities of production, innumerable as
they are, as to be in a position to make straightway evident judgments of value without the aid
of some system of computation.
(2) What is needed, then, to produce the cardinal
numbers necessary for computing the costs and benefits of production processes is what Mises (p. 15) calls
the “intellectual division of labor” which emerges when
private property owners are at liberty to exchange goods
and services against money according to their individual
value judgments and price appraisements. Thus in a market society every individual mind is accorded a dual role
in determining the quantities of monetary calculation. In
their consumer roles, all people make monetary bids for
the existing stocks of final goods according to their subjective valuations, leading to the emergence of objective
monetary exchange ratios which relate the values of all
consumer goods to one another.
In light of the system of consumer goods’ prices thus
determined, and of the existing knowledge of the technical
conditions of production, entrepreneurs seeking to maximize monetary profit bid against one another to acquire
the services of the productive factors currently available and
owned by these same consumers (including those in entrepreneurial roles). In this competitive process, each and
every type of productive service is objectively appraised in
monetary terms according to its ultimate contribution to
the production of consumer goods. There thus comes into
being the market’s monetary price structure, a genuinely
“social” phenomenon in which every unit of exchangeable
goods and services is assigned a socially significant cardinal
52

Ludwig von Mises

number and which has its roots in the minds of every single
member of society yet must forever transcend the contribution of the individual human mind.
(3) Since the social price structure is continually being destroyed and recreated at every moment of time by
the competitive appraisement process operating in the face
of ceaseless change of the economic data, there is always
available to entrepreneurs the means of estimating the
costs and revenues and calculating the profitability of any
thinkable process of production.
Once private property in the nonhuman means of
production is abolished, however, as it is under socialism,
the appraisement process must grind to a halt, leaving only
the increasingly irrelevant memory of the market’s final
price structure. In the absence of competitive bidding for
productive resources by entrepreneurs, there is no possibility of assigning economic meaning to the amalgam of
potential physical productivities embodied in each of the
myriad of natural resources and capital goods now in the
hands of the socialist central planners.
Even if planners observed the money prices which
continued to be generated on an unhampered market for
consumer goods, or substituted their own unitary scale of
values for those of their subject consumers, there would
still be no possibility for the central planners to ever know
or guess the “opportunity cost” of any social production
process. Where actors, in principle, are not in a position
to compare the estimated costs and benefits of their decisions, economizing activities, by definition, are ruled out.
A society without monetary calculation, that is, a socialist society, is therefore quite literally a society without
53

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

an economy. Thus, contrary to what has become the conventional interpretation by friend and foe alike, Mises (pp.
18 and 23) was not indulging in rhetorical hyperbole but
drily stating a demonstrable conclusion of economic science when he declared in this article:
Without economic calculation there can be no
economy. Hence in a socialist state wherein the
pursuit of economic calculation is impossible,
there can be—in our sense of the term—no economy whatsoever. . . . Socialism is the abolition of
rational economy.
(4) Socialism will have particularly devastating effects
on the economy’s capital structure. Without a unitary expression for time preferences in monetary terms, central
planners will never know whether the investment of current resources in the higher stages of production, which
yield physically heterogeneous and noncommensurable
outputs, will generate an overall production structure
whose parts fit together or whose intended length is adjusted to the amount of capital available. Thus higher-order technical processes will be undertaken whose outputs
cannot be used in further production processes because the
needed complementary producer goods are not available.
In the Soviet Union, for example, in the midst of a dire
undersupply of food products, new and unused tractors
stand rusting in fields of unharvested grain, because there
does not exist sufficient fuel to power them, labor to operate them, or structures to house them. One of the most
important consequences of the fact that centrally planned
economies exist within a world market economy is that the
planners can observe and crudely copy capitalist economies
54

Ludwig von Mises

in deciding which technical processes can coexist in a reasonably coherent capital structure. Had the entire world,
rather than isolated nations, existed under central planning for the last half century, the global capital structure
would long since have crumbled irretrievably to dust and
humanity been catapulted back to autarkic primitivism.
(5) Thus, from the first, Mises emphasized the point,
which was conveniently ignored by hostile and disingenuous critics: that the existence of the Soviet Union and
other centrally-controlled economies is no refutation of
his thesis regarding the impossibility of socialist economy.
Their gross inefficiency notwithstanding, these economies
in fact do eke out a precarious existence as parasites on the
social appraisement process and integrated capital structure produced by the surrounding world market. As Mises
(pp. 17–18) points out, neither these economies nor nationalized enterprises within capitalist economies are genuinely socialistic, because both entities
are so much dependent upon the environing economic system with its free commerce that they
cannot be said to partake . . . of the really essential
nature of a socialist economy. . . . In state and
municipal undertakings technical improvements
are introduced because their effect in similar private enterprises, domestic and foreign, can be noticed, and because those private industries which
produce the materials for these improvements
give the impulse for their introduction. In these
concerns the advantages of reorganization can
be established, because they operate within the
sphere of a society based upon the private ownership of the means of production and upon the
55

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

system of monetary exchange, being thus capable
of computation and account.
(6) But Mises does not stop with the demonstration
that socialism must eradicate economizing activity within
the social nexus; he also traces out its implications for the
development of the human mind. With the dissolution
of social production that inevitably ensures upon the imposition of a world-embracing socialist state, humanity is
reduced in short order to dependence upon economic activities carried on in relative isolation. The primitive production processes suitable to autarkic economies do not
require economic calculation using cardinal numbers nor
do such simple processes offer much scope for purely technical calculation. No longer dependent upon arithmetic
operations to sustain itself, the human mind begins to lose
its characteristic ability to calculate.
Mises’s analysis of the effects of socialism also has
another momentous implication. With the impossibility
of building up and maintaining a capital structure in the
absence of monetary calculation, human economy under
socialism comes to consist of super-short and repetitive
household processes utilizing minimal capital and with
little scope for adjustment to new wants. The result is
that time itself—in the praxeological sense of a distinction between present and future—ceases to play a role in
human affairs. Men and women, in their capitalless, handto-mouth existence, begin to passively experience time as
the brute beasts do—not actively as a tool of planning and
action but passively as mere duration. Humanity as a teleological force in the universe is therefore necessarily a creation
of the inextricably related phenomena of calculation and
56

Ludwig von Mises

capital. In a meaningful sense, then, socialism not only
exterminates economy and society but the human intellect
and spirit as well.

Mises vs. the Hayekians
(1) It is of utmost importance to recognize that, in his
original article as well as all later writings on the subject,
Mises unswervingly identified the unique and insoluble
problem of socialism as the impossibility of calculation—
not, as in the case of F.A. Hayek, as an absence of an efficient mechanism for conveying knowledge to the planners. This difference between Mises and Hayek is reflected
in their respective conceptions of the social function of
competition as well as in their responses to the claims of
the later market and mathematical socialists. Actually,
Mises anticipated and refuted both groups in his original
article. Nonetheless, Mises’s position on these issues is today generally ignored or conflated with Hayek’s.
(2) For Mises, the starting point for entrepreneurial
planning of production in a market economy is the experience of the present (actually immediately past) price structure of the market as well as of the underlying economic
data. Knowledge of past market prices by the entrepreneur
does not substitute for qualitative information about the
economy, as Hayek seems to argue, but is necessarily complementary to it. The reason, for Mises, is that it is price
structures as they emerge at future moments of time that
are relevant to unavoidably time-consuming and therefore
future-oriented production plans. But entrepreneurs can
never know future prices directly; they are only able to
57

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

appraise them in light of their “experience” of past prices
and of their “understanding” of what transformations will
take place in the present configuration of the qualitative
economic data. Whether or not one prefers to characterize
entrepreneurial forecasting and appraisement as a procedure for “discovery” of knowledge, as Hayek does, what is
important is that for Mises it is the indispensable starting
point of the competitive process and not its social culminant.
In other words, the forecasting and appraisement of
future price structures in which discovery of new knowledge may be said to play a role is a precompetitive and
nonsocial operation, that is, it precedes and conditions
competitive entrepreneurial bidding for existing factors of
production and is carried on wholly within the compass
of individual minds. The social function of competition,
on the other hand, is the objective price appraisement of
the higher-order goods, the sine qua non of entrepreneurial
calculation of the profitability of alternative production
plans. Competition therefore acquires the characteristic
of a quintessentially social process, not because its operation presupposes knowledge discovery, which is inescapably an individual function, but because, in the absence of
competitively determined money prices for the factors of
production, possession of literally all the knowledge in the
world would not enable an individual to allocate productive resources economically within the social division of
labor.
(3) Mises thus assumes in all his writings on the subject that the planners have full knowledge of consumer
valuations of final goods as well as of the various means
58

Ludwig von Mises

available for producing these goods under known technological conditions. For example, Mises (p. 21) writes,
The administration may know exactly what goods
are most urgently needed. . . . It may also be able
to calculate the value of any means of production
by calculating the consequence of its withdrawal
in relation to the satisfaction of needs.
Despite this knowledge, the socialist administrators would
be unable to arrive at a useful social appraisement of the
means of production in cardinal terms. This can only occur where there exists private ownership and exchange of
productive resources, which generate catallactic competition among independent producers resulting in the imputation of meaningful money prices to the resources.
(4) Anticipating the future arguments of market socialists, Mises reasons that any attempt to implement
monetary calculation by forcing or inducing managers of
socialist enterprises to act as profit-maximizing (or even
more absurdly, price-and-marginal-cost-equalizing) entrepreneurs founders on the fact that these managers do not
have an ownership interest in the capital and output of
their enterprises. Consequently, the bids they make against
one another in seeking to acquire investment funds and
purchase productive resources must result in interest rates
and prices that are wholly and inescapably arbitrary and
useless as tools of economic calculation.
The meaninglessness of these so-called “parametric
prices” of market socialism, and their failure to replicate
the price structure of the market, derives from the circumstance that they are wholly conditioned by the system of
59

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

rewards and penalties and other arrangements instituted
by the monopoly owners of the factors of production (the
planners) to guide the behavior of their managers. But this
system of managerial incentives is itself a construct of the
individual human mind, which would first have to solve
for itself the problem of valuing the factors of production
before it could even hope to devise the proper (but now
superfluous) incentive structure.
(5) Hayek and his followers are skeptical regarding
how quickly and effectively dispersed knowledge of the
changing economic circumstances can be incorporated
into the socialist price system. But for Mises’s analysis, this
is quite beside the point. Regardless of how well-informed
the socialist managers are, their bids in the “market” for
factors of production, to which the central planners are
supposed to adjust the price parameters of the system,
emerge from an arbitrary set of directives from the planners themselves and not from competition among private
property owners. The prices could be no more useless for
the task of economic calculation, if the planners eschewed
the elaborate and wasteful charade of orchestrating a pseudo-market and simply picked them out of a hat.
(6) From the Misesian point of view, moreover, the
shortcomings of the prices of market socialism do not stem
from the fact that such prices are supposed to be treated
as “parametric” by the managers, as has been curiously argued recently by some of Mises’s followers. The problem
is precisely that such prices are not genuinely parametric
from the point of view of all members of the social body.
The prices which emerge on the free market are meaningful for economic calculation because and to the extent
60

Ludwig von Mises

that they are determine by a social appraisement process,
which, though it is the inevitable outcome of the mental
operations of all consumers and producers, yet enters as an
unalterable external factor in the buying and selling plans
of every individual actor.
(7) In the 1930s, Hayek and the British Misesian Lionel (later Lord) Robbins made a fateful and wholly unwarranted concession to those who contended that the methods of mathematical economics could be successfully bent
to yield a solution for the socialist calculation problem.
In response to the argument that prices of the factors of
production would emerge from the solution of a set of
simultaneous equations which incorporated the given data
of the economic system, Hayek and Robbins argued that
in “theory” this was true but in “practice,” highly problematic.
The reason for its impracticality, according to Hayek
and Robbins, is that, in the real-world economy, consumer
wants, available resources, and technology are subject to
continual and unforeseeable change. Therefore, by the
time the planners had assembled the vast amount of information needed to formulate the massive equation system
and succeeded in solving it (manually or mechanically,
since there were no high-speed computers in the 1930s),
the system of prices which emerged would be completely
inapplicable to the current economy, whose underlying
data had changed rapidly and unpredictably in the meantime.
Unfortunately, the Hayek-Robbins response was construed by most economists to mean that the theoretical
debate over socialist calculation had come to an end with
61

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

the concession from the Misesian side that socialism could
calculate after all, though perhaps a day late in practice.
Moreover, some modern Austrian economists, in a belated
effort to reclaim the theoretical high ground, reconstructed
the case against socialism along lines suggested by Hayek’s
later articles on knowledge and competition, which, for all
their subtle and compelling argumentation, are disturbingly quasi-Walrasian, seemingly disregarding the lapse of
time between present and future prices. The result has been
an unacknowledged but momentous retreat from the original and unrefuted Misesian critique emphasizing the absolute impossibility of economic calculation without market
prices to a categorically different Hayekian position criticizing the relative inefficiency of nonmarket mechanisms
for discovery, communication, and use of knowledge in the
allocation of productive resources.
(8) In sharp contrast to the Hayek-Robbins rejoinder
and the reconstructed Austrian position, Mises’s neglected
refutation of the mathematical socialists, which is outlined
in his original article (pp. 22–23) and elaborated upon
in Human Action, does not deviate in the slightest from
the fundamental and crucial calculation perspective. Thus
Mises assumes that the economic data underlying an existing market economy are suddenly and forever frozen and
revealed to newly appointed central planners.
With brilliant insight, Mises demonstrates that, even
with Hayekian knowledge problems thus banished from
consideration, the planners would still be unable to calculate the optimal or any pattern of deployment for the factors of production. The reason is that the existing capital
structure and acquired skills and locations of the labor
62

Ludwig von Mises

force are initially maladjusted to the newly prevailing equilibrium configuration of the data. The planners therefore
would be forced to decide how to allocate the flow of productive services among the myriads of potential technical
production processes and labor retraining and relocation
projects so as to secure the optimal path of adjustment to
equilibrium for the existing stocks of capital goods, labor
skills, and housing. The bewildering complexity of this allocation decision rests on the fact that the planners will be
confronted with altered conditions at every moment of time
during this disequilibrium transition process, since the
quantities and qualities of the available productive services
themselves are in constant flux due to the circumstance
that they originate in the very stocks of physical assets and
labor skills that are being progressively transformed.
(9) Complicating this problem beyond conception is
the added fact that the leveling of incomes under the new
socialist regime and the inevitable fluctuation of current
incomes attending the transformation of the production
structure would effect a continual revolution in the structure of consumer demands during the transition period.
Mises (p. 23) is surely not overstating his case when he
concludes that
the transition to socialism must . . . change all
economic data in such a way that a connecting
link with the final state of affairs in the previously
existent competitive economy becomes impossible. But then we have the spectacle of a socialist economic order floundering in the ocean of
possible and conceivable economic combinations
without the compass of economic calculation.
63

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

Even if mathematics, therefore, yields a consistent set
of prices for the given data of equilibrium, this solution is
inapplicable to the calculation problems of the dynamic
approach to equilibrium. In this situation, use of such
prices to allocate resources does not allow the economy to
achieve equilibrium, at any rate, before the capital structure and the entire system of social production is demolished.
Thus Mises’s original thesis stands on its own against
all counterarguments and without any need for qualification or emendation: without private ownership of the
means of production, and catallactic competition for
them, there cannot exist economic calculation and rational allocation of resources under conditions of the social
division of labor. In short, socialist economy and society
are impossible.

Beyond Socialism
(1) But though Mises’s thesis may remain valid, is it
sill relevant in a world in which socialist planned economies have collapsed like a house of cards? The answer is a
resounding “yes,” for Mises’s argument (p. 17) implies that
“Every step that takes us away from private ownership of
the means of production and from the use of money also
takes us away from rational economics.”
The never-ending growth of the bloated, rapacious,
unjust, and unlovely American and other Western-style
welfare states involves an ongoing series of such steps.
Looking at it from another angle, the blessedly defunct
planned economies of Eastern Europe, as noted above,
were far from being genuinely socialist economies in the
64

Ludwig von Mises

Misesian sense, because of their ability to trade in and observe the capital complementarities and prices of the world
market. They were, and the Soviet Union, China, and others still are, gigantic monopoloid entities that suppress internal markets for capital goods yet maintain subjective
and objective relationships with the world market order
which enables them to crudely calculate their actions.
As the parasitic welfare state expands its power of
monetary inflation and of regulating and intervening into
its host “mixed” economy, we can expect productive activities to become more chaotic and guided less and less by
socially-determined market prices. In fact, long before a
state of complete socialization is achieved, economy and
society will begin to disintegrate amid failure of markets
to clear, increasing barter, less efficient sizes and forms of
business organizations, misallocation, and technical inefficiency of productive resources and disastrous declines
of gross capital investment, labor productivity, and living
standards. The dangers currently threatening to plunge
sectors of the U.S. economy into calculational chaos can
be illustrated with a few examples.
(2) Let us consider inflation. One of the most important factors operating to restrain governments of the
United States and other mixed economies from reinstituting the inflationary monetary policies which brought
us the double-digit rates of price increase of the 1970s is
the coexistence of closely integrated global capital markets
and independent national fiat currencies issued by central
banks jealous of their prerogatives. Any nation that attempts a highly inflationary monetary policy courts the
prospect of a rapidly depreciating exchange rate for its
65

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

currency, a “flight” of investors from its domestic capital
market, and a stratospheric climb in interest rates. In the
current jargon, monetary authorities, even of large nations
such as the United States, have “lost control of domestic
interest rates.”
Now, there is a much ballyhooed movement afoot to
effect greater international “coordination” of monetary
and fiscal policies or even to introduce a supranational
central bank empowered to issue its own fiat currency. At
bottom, such proposals seek to loosen the restraints on
monetary inflation at the domestic level and allow politicians and bureaucrats and their allowed special interests to
surreptitiously extract an expanding flow of lucre or “welfare” from the productive sectors of their economies.
More importantly from our point of view, these international monetary arrangements greatly increase the threat
of hyperinflation and the consequent disintegration of the
world market economy. Moreover, even if it were reined in
before hiving off into hyper-inflationary currency collapse,
a bout of galloping inflation in an economy with a highly
developed and complex capital structure would drastically
falsify monetary calculation and cause capital consumption and a drastic plunge in living standards.
(3) Another area in which we face the prospect of calculational chaos is health care. By wildly subsidizing and
stimulating the demand for health care services of selected
special interest groups beginning in the mid-1960s, the
United States government precipitated a never ending and
catastrophic upward-spiral of health care costs.
In addition, the irrational and labyrinthine structure
of regulations and prohibitions imposed by government
66

Ludwig von Mises

on the industry has massively distorted resource allocation, restricted supply, and further driven up the costs of
medical care. The tragic but predictable result of such intervention is that many of the unsubsidized members of
society have been effectively priced out of the market for
health care. The simple and humane solution to this tragedy is to quickly terminate these antisocial subsidies and
dismantle the destructive regulatory structure, permitting
the competitive price appraisement and resource allocation process too operate unimpeded.
But, of course, the internal dynamic of the welfare
state is never to retrench and risk disaffection of its pampered and powerful constituencies, for example, the American Medical Association, the American Association for
Retired Persons, the entrenched bureaucracies of nonprofit
hospitals, and so on. And so we face the prospect of “national health care insurance” which is a euphemism for the
thoroughgoing socialization of the health care sector, with
its resultant shortages, further suppression of competitive
incentives, and deterioration of quality. But this is simply another example of the mad logic of the welfare state:
since the government produces nothing that is valuable in
terms of social appraisement, it can only supply welfare to
some by siphoning off the resources and destroying the
economic arrangements that support the welfare of others.
In attempting to repair the politically unpopular destruction of its earlier policies, it is driven to further isolated
acts of destruction until it arrives, with cruel and ultimate
irony, at the policy for the systematic destruction of society
and human welfare, that is, socialism.
67

Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth

(4) Finally, we have environmental policies, which are
becoming progressively broader in scope and more draconian in enforcement. To the extent that such policies go
beyond the protection of individual rights and property—
and they are now far, far beyond this point—they become
antisocial and destructive of capital and living standards.
In fact, in many if not in most cases, it is the obliteration of economic productivity per se which is intended and
which constitutes the in-kind welfare subsidy to the wellheeled and well-organized minority of upper-middle class
environmentalists.
This is true, for example, of environmental regulations that prohibit development activities for the vast majority of Alaskan land and along much of the California
coastline as well as of recent calls for suppressing development of Amazon rain forest and coercively maintaining
the entire continent of Antarctica forever wild. Needless
to say, thoroughgoing and centralized land use regulations, which some fanatical environmentalists are calling
for, is tantamount to the abolition of private property in
national resources and business structures. The connection
between environmentalism and socialism is even stronger
when we realize that what socialism brings about unintentionally—the abolition of humanity as a teleological force
shaping nature to its purposes—is precisely the aim of the
radical environmentalist program.

Conclusion
The significance of Mises’s 1920 article extends far beyond its devastating demonstration of the impossibility of
68

Ludwig von Mises

socialist economy and society. It provides the rationale for
the price system, purely free markets, the security of private
property against all encroachments, and sound money. Its
thesis will continue to be relevant as long as economists
and policy-makers want to understand why even minor
government economic interventions consistently fail to
achieve socially beneficial results. “Economic Calculation
in the Socialist Commonwealth” surely ranks among the
most important economic articles written this century.
Joseph T. Salerno
Associate Professor of Economics
Lubin Graduate School of Business
Pace University
April 1990

69

