The Theory of Money and Credit
by

Ludwig von Mises

Translated from the German by H. E. Batson

Liberty Fund
Indianapolis, 1981

Econlib Editor's Notes
Ludwig von Mises (1881-1973) first published The Theory of Money and Credit in
German, in 1912. The edition presented here is that published by Liberty Fund in
1980, which was translated from the German by H. E. Batson originally in 1934,
with additions in 1953. We are grateful to Bettina Bien Greaves, who holds the
copyright, for permission to reprint this work on the Econlib website.

N.1

Only a few corrections of obvious typos were made for this website edition. One
character substitution has been made: the ordinary character "C" has been
substituted for the "checked C" in the name Cuhel.

N.2

Footnote references in the text are color coded according to authorship as follows:
Mises's original notes, color-coded blue in the text, are unbracketed and
unlabeled in the footnote file. Also color-coded blue and unbracketed are
notes in sections written by others: Batson's Appendix B, the Foreword,
and
Introduction.
[Batson's notes, color-coded gold in the text, are bracketed in the
footnote
file,
and
initialed
H.E.B.]
Occasional website (Library of Economics and Liberty) Editor's notes,
color-coded red in the text, are unbracketed and indicated by asterisks
without numbers in the text.
14*

14*

*

PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION
Forty years have passed since the first German-language edition of this volume was
published. In the course of these four decades the world has gone through many
disasters and catastrophes. The policies that brought about these unfortunate events
have also affected the nations' currency systems. Sound money gave way to
progressively depreciating fiat money. All countries are today vexed by inflation
and threatened by the gloomy prospect of a complete breakdown of their
currencies.

P.1

There is need to realize the fact that the present state of the world and especially the
present state of monetary affairs are the necessary consequences of the application
of the doctrines that have got hold of the minds of our contemporaries. The great
inflations of our age are not acts of God. They are man-made or, to say it bluntly,
government-made. They are the offshoots of doctrines that ascribe to governments
the magic power of creating wealth out of nothing and of making people happy by
raising the "national income."

P.2

One of the main tasks of economics is to explode the basic inflationary fallacy that
confused the thinking of authors and statesmen from the days of John Law down to
those of Lord Keynes. There cannot be any question of monetary reconstruction
and economic recovery as long as such fables as that of the blessing of
"expansionism" form an integral part of official doctrine and guide the economic
policies of the nations.

P.3

None of the arguments that economics advances against the inflationist and
expansionist doctrine is likely to impress demagogues. For the demagogue does not
bother about the remoter consequences of his policies. He chooses inflation and
credit expansion although he knows that the boom they create is short-lived and
must inevitably end in a slump. He may even boast of his neglect of the long-run
effects. In the long run, he repeats, we are all dead; it is only the short run that
counts.

P.4

But the question is, how long will the short run last? It seems that statesmen and
politicians have considerably overrated the duration of the short run. The correct
diagnosis of the present state of affairs is this: We have outlived the short run and
have now to face the long-run consequences that political parties have refused to
take into account. Events turned out precisely as sound economics, decried as
orthodox by the neo-inflationist school, had prognosticated.

P.5

In this situation an optimist may hope that the nations will be prepared to learn
what they blithely disregarded only a short time ago. It is this optimistic
expectation that prompted the publishers to republish this book and the author to
add to it as an epilogue an essay on monetary reconstruction (part four).
LUDWIG VON MISES
New York

June 1952

PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION
The outward guise assumed by the questions with which banking and currency
policy is concerned changes from month to month and from year to year. Amid this
flux, the theoretical apparatus which enables us to deal with these questions
remains unaltered. In fact, the value of economics lies in its enabling us to
recognize the true significance of problems, divested of their accidental trimmings.
No very deep knowledge of economics is usually needed for grasping the
immediate effects of a measure; but the task of economics is to foretell the remoter
effects, and so to allow us to avoid such acts as attempt to remedy a present ill by
sowing the seeds of a much greater ill for the future.

HP.1

Ten years have elapsed since the second German edition of the present book was
published. During this period the external appearance of the currency and banking
problems of the world has completely altered. But closer examination reveals that
the same fundamental issues are being contested now as then. Then, England was
on the way to raising the gold value of the pound once more to its prewar level. It
was overlooked that prices and wages had adapted themselves to the lower value
and that the reestablishment of the pound at the prewar parity was bound to lead to
a fall in prices which would make the position of the entrepreneur more difficult
and so increase the disproportion between actual wages and the wages that would
have been paid in a free market. Of course, there were some reasons for attempting
to reestablish the old parity, even despite the indubitable drawbacks of such a
proceeding. The decision should have been made after due consideration of the
pros and cons of such a policy. The fact that the step was taken without the public
having been sufficiently informed beforehand of its inevitable drawbacks,
extraordinarily strengthened the opposition to the gold standard. And yet the evils
that were complained of were not due to the resumption of the gold standard, as
such, but solely to the gold value of the pound having been stabilized at a higher
level than corresponded to the level of prices and wages in the United Kingdom.

HP.2

From 1926 to 1929 the attention of the world was chiefly focused upon the
question of American prosperity. As in all previous booms brought about by
expansion of credit, it was then believed that the prosperity would last forever, and
the warnings of the economists were disregarded. The turn of the tide in 1929 and
the subsequent severe economic crisis were not a surprise for economists; they had
foreseen them, even if they had not been able to predict the exact date of their
occurrence.

HP.3

The remarkable thing in the present situation is not the fact that we have just passed
through a period of credit expansion that has been followed by a period of
depression, but the way in which governments have been and are reacting to these
circumstances. The universal endeavor has been made, in the midst of the general
fall of prices, to ward off the fall in money wages, and to employ public resources
on the one hand to bolster up undertakings that would otherwise have succumbed

HP.4

forces which in previous times of depression have eventually effected the
adjustment of prices and wages to the existing circumstances and so paved the way
for recovery. The unwelcome truth has been ignored that stabilization of wages
must mean increasing unemployment and the perpetuation of the disproportion
between prices and costs and between outputs and sales which is the symptom of a
crisis.
This attitude was dictated by purely political considerations. Gov ernments did not
want to cause unrest among the masses of their wage-earning subjects. They did
not dare to oppose the doctrine that regards high wages as the most important
economic ideal and believes that trade-union policy and government intervention
can maintain the level of wages during a period of falling prices. And governments
have therefore done everything to lessen or remove entirely the pressure exerted by
circumstances upon the level of wages. In order to prevent the underbidding of
trade-union wages, they have given unemployment benefits to the growing masses
of those out of work and they have prevented the central banks from raising the rate
of interest and restricting credit and so giving free play to the purging process of
the crisis.

HP.5

When governments do not feel strong enough to procure by taxation or borrowing
the resources to meet what they regard as irreducible expenditure, or, alternatively,
so to restrict their expenditure that they are able to make do with the revenue that
they have, recourse on their part to the issue of inconvertible notes and a
consequent fall in the value of money are something that has occurred more than
once in European and American history. But the motive for recent experiments in
depreciation has been by no means fiscal. The gold content of the monetary unit
has been reduced in order to maintain the domestic wage level and price level, and
in order to secure advantages for home industry against its competitors in
international trade. Demands for such action are no new thing either in Europe or in
America. But in all previous cases, with a few significant exceptions, those who
have made these demands have not had the power to secure their fulfillment. In this
case, however, Great Britain began by abandoning the old gold content of the
pound. Instead of preserving its gold value by employing the customary and neverfailing remedy of raising the bank rate, the government and parliament of the
United Kingdom, with bank rate at four and one-half percent, preferred to stop the
redemption of notes at the old legal parity and so to cause a considerable fall in the
value of sterling. The object was to prevent a further fall of prices in England and
above all, apparently, to avoid a situation in which reductions of wages would be
necessary.

HP.6

The example of Great Britain was followed by other countries, notably by the
United States. President Roosevelt reduced the gold content of the dollar because
he wished to prevent a fall in wages and to restore the price level of the prosperous
period between 1926 and 1929.

HP.7

In central Europe, the first country to follow Great Britain's example was the
Republic of Czechoslovakia. In the years immediately after the war,
Czechoslovakia, for reasons of prestige, had heedlessly followed a policy which
aimed at raising the value of the krone, and she did not come to a halt until she was

HP.8

prevent a fall of wages and prices and so to encourage exportation and restrict
importation. Today, in every country in the world, no question is so eagerly
debated as that of whether the purchasing power of the monetary unit shall be
maintained or reduced.
It is true that the universal assertion is that all that is wanted is the reduction of
purchasing power to its previous level, or even the prevention of a rise above its
present level. But if this is all that is wanted, it is very difficult to see why the
1926-29 level should always be aimed at, and not, say, that of 1913.

HP.9

If it should be thought that index numbers offer us an instrument for providing
currency policy with a solid foundation and making it independent of the changing
economic programs of governments and political parties, perhaps I may be
permitted to refer to what I have said in the present work on the impossibility of
singling out any particular method of calculating index numbers as the sole
scientifically correct one and calling all the others scientifically wrong. There are
many ways of calculating purchasing power by means of index numbers, and every
single one of them is right, from certain tenable points of view; but every single
one of them is also wrong, from just as many equally tenable points of view. Since
each method of calculation will yield results that are different from those of every
other method, and since each result, if it is made the basis of prac tical measures,
will further certain interests and injure others, it is obvious that each group of
persons will declare for those methods that will best serve its own interests. At the
very moment when the manipulation of purchasing power is declared to be a
legitimate concern of currency policy, the question of the level at which this
purchasing power is to be fixed will attain the highest political significance. Under
the gold standard, the determination of the value of money is dependent upon the
profitability of gold production. To some, this may appear a disadvantage; and it is
certain that it introduces an incalculable factor into economic activity.
Nevertheless, it does not lay the prices of commodities open to violent and sudden
changes from the monetary side. The biggest variations in the value of money that
we have experienced during the last century have originated not in the
circumstances of gold production, but in the policies of governments and banks-ofissue. Dependence of the value of money on the production of gold does at least
mean its independence of the politics of the hour The dissociation of the currencies
from a definitive and unchangeable gold parity has made the value of money a
plaything of politics. Today we see considerations of the value of money driving all
other considerations into the background in both domestic and international
economic policy. We are not very far now from a state of affairs in which
"economic policy" is primarily understood to mean the question of influencing the
purchasing power of money. Are we to maintain the present gold content of the
currency unit, or are we to go over to a lower gold content? That is the question
that forms the principal issue nowadays in the economic polic ies of all European
and American countries. Perhaps we are already in the midst of a race to reduce the
gold content of the currency unit with the object of obtaining transitory advantages
(which, moreover, are based on self-deception) in the commercial war which the
nations of the civilized world have been waging for decades with increasing
acrimony, and with disastrous effects upon the welfare of their subjects.

HP.10

It is an unsatisfactory designation of this state of affairs to call it an emancipation
from gold. None of the countries that have "abandoned the gold standard" during

HP.11

creditor, even though the principal aim of the measures may have been to secure
the greatest possible stability of nominal wages, and sometimes of prices also.
Besides the countries that have debased the gold value of their currencies for the
reasons described, there is another group of countries that refuse to acknowledge
the depreciation of their money in terms of gold that has followed upon an
excessive expansion of the domestic note circulation, and maintain the fiction that
their currency units still possess their legal gold value, or at least a gold value in
excess of its real level. In order to support this fiction they have issued foreignexchange regulations which usually require exporters to sell foreign exchange at its
legal gold value, that is, at a considerable loss. The fact that the amount of foreign
money that is sold to the central banks in such circumstances is greatly diminished
can hardly require further elucidation. In this way a "shortage of foreign exchange"

HP.12

have called into being the modern productive equipment of the whole world. If the
debtor countries refuse to pay their existing debts, they certainly ameliorate their
immediate situation. But it is very questionable whether they do not at the same
time greatly damage their future prospects. It consequently seems misleading in
discussions of the currency question to talk of an opposition between the interests
of creditor and debtor nations, of those which are well supplied with capital and
those which are ill supplied. It is the interests of the poorer countries, who are
dependent upon the importation of foreign capital for developing their productive
resources, that make the throttling of international credit seem so extremely
dangerous.
The dislocation of the monetary and credit system that is nowadays going on
everywhere is not due—the fact cannot be repeated too often—to any inadequacy
of the gold standard. The thing for which the monetary system of our time is
chiefly blamed, the fall in prices during the last five years, is not the fault of the
gold standard, but the inevitable and ineluctable consequence of the expansion of
credit, which was bound to lead eventually to a collapse. And the thing which is
chiefly advocated as a remedy is nothing but another expansion of credit, such as
certainly might lead to a transitory boom, but would be bound to end in a
correspondingly severer crisis.

HP.13

The difficulties of the monetary and credit system are only a part of the great
economic difficulties under which the world is at present suffering. It is not only
the monetary and credit system that is out of gear, but the whole economic system.
For years past, the economic policy of all countries has been in conflict with the
principles on which the nineteenth century built up the welfare of the nations.
International division of labor is now regarded as an evil, and there is a demand for
a return to the autarky of remote antiquity. Every importation of foreign goods is
heralded as a misfortune, to be averted at all costs. With prodigious ardour, mighty
political parties proclaim the gospel that peace on earth is undesirable and that war
alone means progress. They do not content themselves with describing war as a
reasonable form of international intercourse, but recommend the employment of
force of arms for the suppression of opponents even in the solution of questions of
domestic politics. Whereas liberal economic policy took pains to avoid putting
obstacles in the way of developments that allotted every branch of production to
the locality in which it secured the greatest productivity to labor, nowadays the
endeavor to establish enterprises in places where the conditions of production are
unfavorable is regarded as a patriotic action that deserves government support. To
demand of the monetary and credit system that it should do away with the
consequences of such perverse economic policy, is to demand something that is a
little unfair.

HP.14

All proposals that aim to do away with the consequences of perverse economic and
financial policy, merely by reforming the monetary and banking system, are
fundamentally misconceived. Money is nothing but a medium of exchange and it
completely fulfills its function when the exchange of goods and services is carried
on more easily with its help than would be possible by means of barter. Attempts to
carry out economic reforms from the monetary side can never amount to anything
but an artificial stimulation of economic activity by an expansion of the circulation,
and this, as must constantly be emphasized, must necessarily lead to crisis and
depression. Recurring economic crises are nothing but the consequence of attempts,
despite all the teachings of experience and all the warnings of the economists, to
stimulate economic activity by means of additional credit.

HP.15

This point of view is sometimes called the "orthodox" because it is related to the
doctrines of the Classical economists who are Great Britain's imperishable glory;

HP.16

doctrines of the Classical economists who are Great Britain's imperishable glory;
and it is contrasted with the "modern" point of view which is expressed in doctrines
that correspond to the ideas of the Mercantilists of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. I cannot believe that there is really anything to be ashamed of in
orthodoxy. The important thing is not whether a doctrine is orthodox or the latest
fashion, but whether it is true or false. And although the conclusion to which my
investigations lead, that expansion of credit cannot form a substitute for capital,
may well be a conclusion that some may find uncomfortable, yet I do not believe
that any logical disproof of it can be brought forward.
LUDWIG VON MISES
Vienna
June 1934

PREFACE TO THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION
When the first edition of this book was published twelve years ago, the nations and
their governments were just preparing for the tragic enterprise of the Great War.
They were preparing, not merely by piling up arms and munitions in their arsenals,
but much more by the proclamation and zealous propagation of the ideology of
war. The most important economic element in this war ideology was inflationism.

HP.17

My book also dealt with the problem of inflationism and attempted to demonstrate
the inadequacy of its doctrines; and it referred to the changes that threatened our
monetary system in the immediate future. This drew upon it passionate attacks
from those who were preparing the way for the monetary catastrophe to come.
Some of those who attacked it soon attained great political influence; they were
able to put their doctrines into practice and to experiment with inflationism upon
their own countries.

HP.18

Nothing is more perverse than the common assertion that economics broke down
when faced with the problems of the war and postwar periods. To make such an
assertion is to be ignorant of the literature of economic theory and to mistake for
economics the doctrines based on excerpts from archives that are to be found in the
writings of the adherents of the historico-empirico-realistic school. Nobody is more
conscious of the shortcomings of economics than economists themselves, and
nobody regrets its gaps and failings more. But all the theoretical guidance that the
politician of the last ten years needed could have been learned from existing
doctrine. Those who have derided and carelessly rejected as "bloodless abstraction"
the assured and accepted results of scientific labor should blame themselves, not
economics.

HP.19

It is equally hard to understand how the assertion could have been made that the
experience of recent years has necessitated a revision of economics. The
tremendous and sudden changes in the value of money that we have experienced
have been nothing new to anybody acquainted with currency history; neither the
variations in the value of money, nor their social consequences, nor the way in
which the politicians reacted to either, were new to economists. It is true that these
experiences were new to many etatists, and this is perhaps the best proof that the
profound knowledge of history professed by these gentlemen was not genuine but
only a cloak for their mercantilistic propaganda.

HP.20

The fact that the present work, although unaltered in essentials, is now published in
a rather different form from that of the first edition is not due to any such reason as
the impossibility of explaining new facts by old doctrines. It is true that, during the
twelve years that have passed since the first edition was published, economics has
made strides that it would be impossible to ignore. And my own occupation with
the problems of catallactics has led me in many respects to conclusions that differ
from those of the first edition. My attitude toward the theory of interest is different
today from what it was in 1911; and although, in preparing this as in preparing the
first edition, I have been obliged to postpone any treatment of the problem of
interest (which lies outside the theory of indirect exchange), in certain parts of the
book it has nevertheless been necessary to refer to the problem. Again, on the
question of crises my opinions have altered in one respect: I have come to the
conclusion that the theory which I put forward as an elaboration and continuation
of the doctrines of the Currency School is in itself a sufficient explanation of crises
and not merely a supplement to an explanation in terms of the theory of direct
exchange, as I supposed in the first edition.

HP.21

Further I have become convinced that the distinction between statics and dynamics
cannot be dispensed with even in expounding the theory of money. In writing the
first edition, I imagined that I should have to do without it, in order not to give rise
to any misunderstandings on the part of the German reader. For in an article that
had appeared shortly before in a widely read symposium, Altmann had used the
concepts "static" and "dynamic," applying them to monetary theory in a sense that
diverged from the terminology of the modern American school. *4 Meanwhile,
however, the significance of the distinction between statics and dynamics in
modern theory has probably become familiar to everybody who, even if not very
closely, has followed the development of economics. It is safe to employ the terms
nowadays without fear of their being confused with Altmann's terminology. I have
in part revised the chapter on the social consequences of variations in the value of
money in order to clarify the argument. In the first edition the chapter on monetary
policy contains long historical discussions; the experiences of recent years afford
sufficient illustrations of the fundamental argument to allow these discussions now
to be dispensed with.

HP.22

A section on problems of banking policy of today has been added, and one in
which the monetary theory and policy of the etatists are briefly examined. In
compliance with a desire of several colleagues I have also included a revised and
expanded version of a short essay on the classification of theories of money, which
was published some years ago in volume 44 of the Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft
und Sozialpolitik.

HP.23

For the rest, it has been far from my intention to deal critically with the flood of
new publications devoted to the problems of money and credit. In science, as
Spinoza says, "the truth bears witness both to its own nature and to that of error."
My book contains critical arguments only where they are necessary to establish my
own views and to explain or prepare the ground for them. This omission can be the
more easily justified in that this task of criticism is skillfully performed in two
admirable works that have recently appeared. *5

HP.24

The concluding chapter of part three, which deals with problems of credit policy, is
reprinted as it stood in the first edition. Its arguments refer to the position of
banking in 1911, but the significance of its theoretical conclusions does not appear
to have altered. They are supplemented by the above-mentioned discussion of the
problems of present-day banking policy that concludes the present edition. But
even in this additional discussion, proposals with any claim to absolute validity
should not be sought for. Its intention is merely to show the nature of the problem

should not be sought for. Its intention is merely to show the nature of the problem
at issue. The choice among all the possible solutions in any individual case depends
upon the evaluation of pros and cons; decision between them is the function not of
economics but of politics.
LUDWIG VON MISES
Vienna
March 1924

PART ONE
THE NATURE OF MONEY

CHAPTER 1
The Function of Money
1 The General Economic Conditions for the Use of Money
Where the free exchange of goods and services is unknown, money is not wanted.
In a state of society in which the division of labor was a purely domestic matter and
production and consumption were consummated within the single household it
would be just as useless as it would be for an isolated man. But even in an
economic order based on division of labor, money would still be unnecessary if the
means of production were socialized, the control of production and the distribution
of the finished product were in the hands of a central body, and individuals were
not allowed to exchange the consumption goods allotted to them for the
consumption goods allotted to others.

I.1.1

The phenomenon of money presupposes an economic order in which production is
based on division of labor and in which private property consists not only in goods
of the first order (consumption goods), but also in goods of higher orders
(production goods). In such a society, there is no systematic centralized control of
production, for this is inconceivable without centralized disposal over the means of
production. Production is "anarchistic." What is to be produced, and how it is to be
produced, is decided in the first place by the owners of the means of pr oduction,
who produce, however, not only for their own needs, but also for the needs of
others, and in their valuations take into account, not only the use-value that they
themselves attach to their products, but also the use-value that these possess in the
estimation of the other members of the community. The balancing of production
and consumption takes place in the market, where the different producers meet to
exchange goods and services by bargaining together. The function of money is to
facilitate the business of the market by acting as a common medium of exchange.

I.1.2

2 The Origin of Money
Indirect exchange is distinguished from direct exchange according as a medium is
involved or not.

I.1.3

Suppose that A and B exchange with each other a number of units of the
commodities m and n. A acquires the commodity n because of the use-value that it
has for him. He intends to consume it. The same is true of B, who acquires the
commodity m for his immediate use. This is a case of direct exchange.

I.1.4

If there are more than two individuals and more than two kinds of commodity in
the market, indirect exchange also is possible. A may then acquire a commodity p,
not because he desires to consume it, but in order to exchange it for a second
commodity q which he does desire to consume. Let us suppose that A brings to the
market two units of the commodity m, B two units of the commodity n, and C two
units of the commodity o, and that A wishes to acquire one unit of each of the
commodities n and o, B one unit of each of the commodities o and m, and C one

I.1.5

unit of each of the commodities m and n. Even in this case a direct exchange is
possible if the subjective valuations of the three commodities permit the exchange
of each unit of m, n, and o for a unit of one of the others. But if this or a similar
hypothesis does not hold good, and in by far the greater number of all exchange
transactions it does not hold good, then indirect exchange becomes necessary, and
the demand for goods for immediate wants is supplemented by a demand for goods
to be exchanged for others. *1
Let us take, for example, the simple case in which the commodity p is desired only
by the holders of the commodity q, while the comodity q is not desired by the
holders of the commodity p but by those, say, of a third commodity r, which in its
turn is desired only by the possessors of p. No direct exchange between these
persons can possibly take place. If exchanges occur at all, they must be indirect; as,
for instance, if the possessors of the commodity p exchange it for the commodity q
and then exchange this for the commodity r which is the one they desire for their
own consumption. The case is not essentially different when supply and demand do
not coincide quantitatively; for example, when one indivisible good has to be
exchanged for various goods in the possession of several persons.

I.1.6

Indirect exchange becomes more necessary as division of labor increases and wants
become more refined. In the present stage of economic development, the occasions
when direct exchange is both possible and actually effected have already become
very exceptional. Nevertheless, even nowadays, they sometimes arise. Take, for
instance, the payment of wages in kind, which is a case of direct exchange so long
on the one hand as the employer uses the labor for the immediate satisfaction of his
own needs and does not have to procure through exchange the goods in which the
wages are paid, and so long on the other hand as the employee consumes the goods
he receives and does not sell them. Such payment of wages in kind is still widely
prevalent in agriculture, although even in this sphere its importance is being
continually diminished by the extension of capitalistic methods of management and
the development of division of labor.*2

I.1.7

Thus along with the demand in a market for goods for direct consumption there is a
demand for goods that the purchaser does not wish to consume but to dispose of by
further exchange. It is clear that not all goods are subject to this sort of demand. An
individual obviously has no motive for an indirect exchange if he does not expect
that it will bring him nearer to his ultimate objective, the acquisition of goods for
his own use. The mere fact that there would be no exchanging unless it was indirect
could not induce individuals to engage in indirect exchange if they secured no
immediate personal advantage from it. Direct exchange being impossible, and
indirect exchange being purposeless from the individual point of view, no
exchange would take place at all. Individuals have recourse to indirect exchange
only when they profit by it; that is, only when the goods they acquire are more
marketable than those which they surrender.

I.1.8

Now all goods are not equally marketable. While there is only a limited and
occasional demand for certain goods, that for others is more general and constant.
Consequently, those who bring goods of the first kind to market in order to
exchange them for goods that they need themselves have as a rule a smaller
prospect of success than those who offer goods of the second kind. If, however,
they exchange their relatively unmarketable goods for such as are more marketable,
they will get a step nearer to their goal and may hope to reach it more surely and
economically than if they had restricted themselves to direct exchange.

I.1.9

It was in this way that those goods that were originally the most marketable
became common media of exchange; that is, goods into which all sellers of other

I.1.10

became common media of exchange; that is, goods into which all sellers of other
goods first converted their wares and which it paid every would-be buyer of any
other commodity to acquire first. And as soon as those commodities that were
relatively most marketable had become common media of exchange, there was an
increase in the difference between their marketability and that of all other
commodities, and this in its turn further strengthened and broadened their position
as media of exchange. *3
Thus the requirements of the market have gradually led to the selection of certain
commodities as common media of exchange. The group of commodities from
which these were drawn was originally large, and differed from country to country;
but it has more and more contracted. Whenever a direct exchange seemed out of
the question, each of the parties to a transaction would naturally endeavor to
exchange his superfluous commodities, not merely for more marketable
commodities in general, but for the most marketable commodities; and among
these again he would naturally prefer whichever particular commodity was the
most marketable of all. The greater the marketability of the goods first acquired in
indirect exchange, the greater would be the prospect of being able to reach the
ultimate objective without further maneuvering. Thus there would be an inevitable
tendency for the less marketable of the series of goods used as media of exchange
to be one by one rejected until at last only a single commodity remained, which
was universally employed as a medium of exchange; in a word, money.

I.1.11

This stage of development in the use of media of exchange, the exclusive
employment of a single economic good, is not yet completely attained. In quite
early times, sooner in some places than in others, the extension of indirect
exchange led to the employment of the two precious metals gold and silver as
common media of exchange. But then there was a long interruption in the steady
contraction of the group of goods employed for that purpose. For hundreds, even
thousands, of years the choice of mankind has wavered undecided between gold
and silver The chief cause of this remarkable phenomenon is to be found in the
natural qualities of the two metals. Being physically and chemically very similar,
they are almost equally serviceable for the satisfaction of human wants. For the
manufacture of ornaments and jewelry of all kinds the one has proved as good as
the other. (It is only in recent times that technological discoveries have been made
which have considerably extended the range of uses of the precious metals and may
have differentiated their utility more sharply.) In isolated communities, the
employment of one or the other metal as sole common medium of exchange has
occasionally been achieved, but this short-lived unity has always been lost again as
soon as the isolation of the community has succumbed to participation in
international trade.

I.1.12

Economic history is the story of the gradual extension of the economic community
beyond its original limits of the single household to embrace the nation and then
the world. But every increase in its size has led to a fresh duality of the medium of
exchange whenever the two amalgamating communities have not had the same sort
of money. It would not be possible for the final verdict to be pronounced until all
the chief parts of the inhabited earth formed a single commercial area, for not until
then would it be impossible for other nations with different monetary systems to
join in and modify the international organization.

I.1.13

Of course, if two or more economic goods had exactly the same marketability, so
that none of them was superior to the others as a medium of exchange, this would
limit the development toward a unified monetary system. We shall not attempt to
decide whether this assumption holds good of the two precious metals gold and
silver. The question, about whic h a bitter controversy has raged for decades, has no

I.1.14

silver. The question, about whic h a bitter controversy has raged for decades, has no
very important bearings upon the theory of the nature of money. For it is quite
certain that even if a motive had not been provided by the unequal marketability of
the goods used as media of exchange, unification would still have seemed a
desirable aim for monetary policy. The simultaneous use of several kinds of money
involves so many disadvantages and so complicates the technique of exchange that
the endeavor to unify the monetary system would certainly have been made in any
case.
The theory of money must take into consideration all that is implied in the
functioning of several kinds of money side by side. Only where its conclusions are
unlikely to be affected one way or the other, may it proceed from the assumption
that a single good is employed as common medium of exchange. Elsewhere, it
must take account of the simultaneous use of several media of exchange. To
neglect this would be to shirk one of its most difficult tasks.

I.1.15

3 The "Secondary" Functions of Money
The simple statement, that money is a commodity whose economic function is to
facilitate the interchange of goods and services, does not satisfy those writers who
are interested rather in the accumulation of material than in the increase of
knowledge. Many investigators imagine that insufficient attention is devoted to the
remarkable part played by money in economic life if it is merely credited with the
function of being a medium of exchange; they do not think that due regard has been
paid to the significance of money until they have enumerated half a dozen further
"functions"—as if, in an economic order founded on the exchange of goods, there
could be a more important function than that of the common medium of exchange.

I.1.16

After Menger's review of the question, further discussion of the connection
between the secondary functions of money and its basic function should be
unnecessary. *4 Neverthele ss, certain tendencies in recent literature on money make
it appear advisable to examine briefly these secondary functions—some of them
are coordinated with the basic function by many writers—and to show once more
that all of them can be deduced from the function of money as a common medium
of exchange.

I.1.17

This applies in the first place to the function fulfilled by money in facilitating
credit transactions. It is simplest to regard this as part of its function as medium of
exchange. Credit transactions are in fact nothing but the exchange of present goods
against future goods. Frequent reference is made in English and American writings
to a function of money as a standard of deferred payments.*5 But the original
purpose of this expression was not to contrast a particular function of money with
its ordinary economic function, but merely to simplify discussions about the
influence of changes in the value of money upon the real amount of money debts. It
serves this purpose admirably. But it should be pointed out that its use has led
many writers to deal with the problems connected with the general economic
consequences of changes in the value of money merely from the point of view of
modifications in existing debt relations and to overlook their significance in all
other connections.

I.1.18

The functions of money as a transmitter of value through time and space may also
be directly traced back to its function as medium of exchange. Menger has pointed
out that the special suitability of goods for hoarding, and their consequent
widespread employment for this purpose, has been one of the most important
causes of their increased marketability and therefore of their qualification as media
of exchange. As soon as the practice of employing a certain economic good as a

I.1.19

of exchange.*6 As soon as the practice of employing a certain economic good as a
medium of exchange becomes general, people begin to store up this good in
preference to others. In fact, hoarding as a form of investment plays no great part in
our present stage of economic development, its place having been taken by the
purchase of interest-bearing property. *7 On the other hand, money still functions
today as a means for transporting value through space.*8 This function again is
nothing but a matter of facilitating the exchange of goods. The European farmer
who emigrates to America and wishes to exchange his property in Europe for a
property in America, sells the former, goes to America with the money (or a bill
payable in money), and there purchases his new homestead. Here we have an
absolute textbook example of an exchange facilitated by money.
Particular attention has been devoted, especially in recent times, to the function of
money as a general medium of payment. Indirect exchange divides a single
transaction into two separate parts which are connected merely by the ultimate
intention of the exchangers to acquire consumption goods. Sale and purchase thus
apparently become independent of each other Furthermore, if the two parties to a
sale-and-purchase transaction perform their respective parts of the bargain at
different times, that of the seller preceding that of the buyer (purchase on credit),
then the settlement of the bargain, or the fulfillment of the seller's part of it (which
need not be the same thing), has no obvious connection with the fulfillment of the
buyer's part. The same is true of all other credit transactions, especially of the most
important sort of credit transaction—lending. The apparent lack of a connection
between the two parts of the single transaction has been taken as a reason for
regarding them as independent proceedings, for speaking of the payment as an
independent legal act, and consequently for attributing to money the function of
being a common medium of payment. This is obviously incorrect. "If the function
of money as an object which facilitates dealings in commodities and capital is kept
in mind, a function that includes the payment of money prices and repayment of
loans...there remains neither necessity nor justification for further discussion of a
specia l employment, or even function of money, as a medium of payment."*9
The root of this error (as of many other errors in economics) must be sought in the
uncritical acceptance of juristical conceptions and habits of thought. From the point
of view of the law, outstanding debt is a subject which can and must be considered
in isolation and entirely (or at least to some extent) without reference to the origin
of the obligation to pay. Of course, in law as well as in economics, money is only
the common medium of exchange. But the principal, although not exclusive,
motive of the law for concerning itself with money is the problem of payment.
When it seeks to answer the question, What is money? it is in order to determine
how monetary liabilities can be discharged. For the jurist, money is a medium of
payment. The economist, to whom the problem of money presents a different
aspect, may not adopt this point of view if he does not wish at the very outset to
prejudice his prospects of contributing to the advancement of economic theory.

I.1.20

CHAPTER 2
On the Measurement of Value
1 The Immeasurability of Subjective Use-Values
Although it is usual to speak of money as a measure of value and prices, the notion
is entirely fallacious. So long as the subjective theory of value is accepted, this
question of measurement cannot arise. In the older political economy, the search
for a principle governing the measurement of value was to a certain extent
justifiable. If, in accordance with an objective theory of value, the possibility of an
objective concept of commodity values is accepted, and exchange is regarded as
the reciprocal surrender of equivalent goods, then the conclusion necessarily
follows that exchange transactions must be preceded by measurement of the
quantity of value contained in each of the objects that are to be exchanged. And it
is then an obvious step to regard money as the measure of value.

I.2.1

But modern value theory has a different starting point. It conceives of value as the
significance attributed to individual commodity units by a human being who
wishes to consume or otherwise dispose of various commodities to the best
advantage. Every economic transaction presupposes a comparison of values. But
the necessity for such a comparison, as well as the possibility of it, is due only to
the circumstance that the person concerned has to choose between several
commodities. It is quite irrelevant whether this choice is between a commodity in
his own possession and one in somebody else's possession for which he might
exchange it, or between the different uses to which he himself might put a given
quantity of productive resources. In an isolated household, in which (as on
Robinson Crusoe's desert island) there is neither buying nor selling, changes in the
stocks of goods of higher and lower orders do nevertheless occur whenever
anything is produced or consumed; and these changes must be based upon
valuations if their returns are to exceed the outlay they involve. The process of
valuation remains fundamentally the same whether the question is one of
transforming labor and flour into bread in the domestic bakehouse, or of obtaining
bread in exchange for clothes in the market. From the point of view of the person
making the valuation, the calculation whether a certain act of production would
justify a certain outlay of goods and labor is exactly the same as the comparison
between the values of the commodities to be surrendered and the values of the
commodities to be acquired that must precede an exchange transaction. For this
reason it has been said that every economic act may be regarded as a kind of
exchange.*10

I.2.2

Acts of valuation are not susceptible of any kind of measurement. It is true that
everybody is able to say whether a certain piece of bread seems more valuable to
him than a certain piece of iron or less valuable than a certain piece of meat. And it
is therefore true that everybody is in a position to draw up an immense list of
comparative values; a list which will hold good only for a given point of time,
since it must assume a given combination of wants and commodities. If the
individual's circumstances change, then his scale of values changes also.

I.2.3

But subjective valuation, which is the pivot of all economic activity, only arranges
commodities in order of their significance; it does not measure this significance.
And economic activity has no other basis than the value scales thus constructed by
individuals. An exchange will take place when two commodity units are placed in a
different order on the value scales of two different persons. In a market, exchanges
will continue until it is no longer possible for reciprocal surrender of commodities

I.2.4

will continue until it is no longer possible for reciprocal surrender of commodities
by any two individuals to result in their each acquiring commodities that stand
higher on their value scales than those surrendered. If an individual wishes to make
an exchange on an economic basis, he has merely to consider the comparative
significance in his own judgment of the quantities of commodities in question.
Such an estimate of relative values in no way involves the idea of measurement. An
estimate is a direct psychological judgment that is not dependent on any kind of
intermediate or auxiliary process.
(Such considerations also provide the answer to a series of objections to the
subjective theory of value. It would be rash to conclude, because psychology has
not succeeded and is not likely to succeed in measuring desires, that it is therefore
impossible ultimately to attribute the quantitatively exact exchange ratios of the
market to subjective factors. The exchange ratios of commodities are based upon
the value scales of the individuals dealing in the market. Suppose that A possesses
three pears and B two apples; and that A values the possession of two apples more
than that of three pears, while B values the possession of three pears more than that
of two apples. On the basis of these estimations an exchange may take place in
which three pears are given for two apples. Yet it is clear that the determination of
the numerically precise exchange ratio 2 : 3, taking a single fruit as a unit, in no
way presupposes that A and B know exactly by how much the satisfaction promised
by possession of the quantities to be acquired by exchange exceeds the satisfaction
promised by possession of the quantities to be given up.)

I.2.5

General recognition of this fact, for which we are indebted to the authors of modern
value theory, was hindered for a long time by a peculiar sort of obstacle. It is not
altogether a rare thing that those very pioneers who have not hesitated to clear new
paths for themselves and their followers by boldly rejecting outworn traditions and
ways of thinking should yet shrink sometimes from all that is involved in the rigid
application of their own principles. When this is so, it remains for those who come
after to endeavor to put the matter right. The present is a case in point. On the
subject of the measurement of value, as on a series of further subjects that are very
closely bound up with it, the founders of the subjective theory of value refrained
from the consistent development of their own doctrines. This is especially true of
Böhm-Bawerk. At least it is especially striking in him; for the arguments of his
which we are about to consider are embodied in a system that would have provided
an alternative and, in the present writer's opinion, a better, solution of the problem,
if their author had only drawn the decisive conclusion from them.

I.2.6

Böhm-Bawerk points out that when we have to choose in actual life between
several satisfactions which cannot be had simultaneously because our means are
limited, the situation is often such that the alternatives are on the one hand one big
satisfaction and on the other hand a large number of homogeneous smaller
satisfactions. Nobody will deny that it lies in our power to come to a rational
decision in such cases. But it is equally clear that a judgment merely to the effect
that a satisfaction of the one sort is greater than a satisfaction of the other sort is
inadequate for such a decision; as would even be a judgment that a satisfaction of
the first sort is considerably greater than one of the other sort. Böhm-Bawerk
therefore concludes that the judgment must definitely affirm how many of the
smaller satisfactions outweigh one of the first sort, or in other words how many
times the one satisfaction exceeds one of the others in magnitude.*11

I.2.7

The credit of having exposed the error contained in the identification of these two
last propositions belongs to Cuhel. The judgment that so many small satisfactions
are outweighed by a satisfaction of another kind is in fact not identical with the
judgment that the one satisfaction is so many times greater than one of the others.

I.2.8

judgment that the one satisfaction is so many times greater than one of the others.
The two would be identical only if the satisfaction afforded by a number of
commodity units taken together were equal to the satisfaction afforded by a single
unit on its own multiplied by the number of units. That this assumption cannot hold
good follows from Gossen's law of the satisfaction of wants. The two judgments, "I
would rather have eight plums than one apple" and "I would rather have one apple
than seven plums," do not in the least justify the conclusion that Böhm-Bawerk
draws from them when he states that therefore the satisfaction afforded by the
consumption of an apple is more than seven times but less than eight times as great
as the satisfaction afforded by the consumption of a plum. The only legitimate
conclusion is that the satisfaction from one apple is greater than the total
satisfaction from seven plums but less than the total satisfaction from eight
plums.*12
This is the only interpretation that can be harmonized with the fundamental
conception expounded by the marginal-utility theorists, and especially by BöhmBawerk himself, that the utility (and consequently the subjective use-value also) of
units of a commodity decreases as the supply of them increases. But to accept this
is to reject the whole idea of measuring the subjective use-value of commodities.
Subjective use-value is not susceptible of any kind of measurement.

I.2.9

The American economist Irving Fisher has attempted to approach the problem of
value measurement by way of mathematics.*13 His success with this method has
been no greater than that of his predecessors with other methods. Like them, he has
not been able to surmount the difficulties arising from the fact that marginal utility
diminishes as supply increases, and the only use of the mathematics in which he
clothes his arguments, and which is widely regarded as a particularly becoming
dress for investigations in economics, is to conceal a little the defects of their clever
but artificial construction.

I.2.10

Fisher begins by assuming that the utility of a particular good or service, though
dependent on the supply of that good or service, is independent of the supply of all
others. He realizes that it will not be possible to achieve his aim of discovering a
unit for the measurement of utility unless he can first show how to determine the
proportion between two given marginal utilities. If, for example, an individual has

I.2.11

were really so, the problem of determining the proportion between two marginal
utilities could have been solved in a quicker way, and his long process of deduction
would not have been necessary. Just as justifiably as he assumes that the utility of
is equal to twice the utility of ?/2, he might have assumed straightaway that the
utility of the 150th loaf is two-thirds of that of the 100th.
Fisher imagines a supply of B gallons that is divisible into n small quantities ? , or
2n small quantities ?/2. He assumes that an individual who has this supply B at his
disposal regards the value of commodity unit x as equal to that of ? and the value
of commodity unit y as equal to that of ?/2. And he makes the further assumption
that in both valuations, that is, both in equating the value of x with that of ? and in
equating the value of y with that of ?/2, the individual has the same supply of B
gallons at his disposal.

I.2.12

He evidently thinks it possible to conclude from this that the utility of ? is twice as
great as that of ?/2. The error here is obvious. The individual is in the one case
faced with the choice between x (the value of the 100th loaf) and ? = 2?/2. He finds
it impossible to decide between the two, i.e., he values both equally. In the second
case he has to choose between y (the value of the 150th loaf) and ?/2. Here again
he finds that both alternatives are of equal value. Now the question arises, what is
the proportion between the marginal utility of ? and that of ?/2? We can determine
this only by asking ourselves what the proportion is between the marginal utility of
the nth part of a given supply and that of the 2nth part of the same supply, between
that of ?/n and that of ?/2n. For this purpose let us imagine the supply B split up
into 2n portions of ?/2n. Then the marginal utility of the (2n-1)th portion is greater
than that of the 2nth portion. If we now imagine the same supply B divided into n
portions, then it clearly follows that the marginal utility of the nth portion is equal
to that of the (2n-1)th portion plus that of the 2nth portion in the previous case. It is
not twice as great as that of the 2nth portion, but more than twice as great. In fact,
even with an unchanged supply, the marginal utility of several units taken together
is not equal to the marginal utility of one unit multiplied by the number of units,
but necessarily greater than this product. The value of two units is greater than, but
not twice as great as, the value of one unit.*14

I.2.13

Perhaps Fisher thinks that this consideration may be disposed of by supposing ?
and ?/2 to be such small quantities that their utility may be reckoned infinitesimal.
If this is really his opinion, then it must first of all be objected that the peculiarly
mathematical conception of infinitesimal quantities is inapplicable to economic
problems. The utility afforded by a given amount of commodities, is either great
enough for valuation, or so small that it remains imperceptible to the valuer and
cannot therefore affect his judgment. But even if the applicability of the conception
of infinitesimal quantities were granted, the argument would still be invalid, for it
is obviously impossible to find the proportion between two finite marginal utilities
by equating them with two infinitesimal marginal utilities.

I.2.14

Finally, a few words must be devoted to Schumpeter's attempt to set up as a unit
the satisfaction resulting from the consumption of a given quantity of commodities
and to express other satisfactions as multiples of this unit. Value judgments on this
principle would have to be expressed as follows: "The satisfaction that I could get
from the consumption of a certain quantity of commodities is a thousand times as
great as that which I get from the consumption of an apple a day," or "For this
quantity of goods I would give at the most a thousand times this apple." *15 Is there
really anybody on earth who is capable of adumbrating such mental images or

I.2.15

dependent on the making of such decisions? Obviously not.*16 Schumpeter makes
the same mistake of starting with the assumption that we need a measure of value
in order to be able to compare one "quantity of value" with another. But valuation
in no way consists in a comparison of two "quantities of value." It consists solely in
a comparison of the importance of different wants. The judgment "Commodity a is
worth more to me than commodity b" no more presupposes a measure of economic
value than the judgment "A is dearer to me—more highly esteemed—than B"
presupposes a measure of friendship.
2 Total Value
If it is impossible to measure subjective use-value, it follows directly that it is
impracticable to ascribe "quantity" to it. We may say, the value of this commodity
is greater than the value of that; but it is not permissible for us to assert, this
commodity is worth so much. Such a way of speaking necessarily implies a definite
unit. It really amounts to stating how many times a given unit is contained in the
quantity to be defined. But this kind of calculation is quite inapplicable to
processes of valuation.

I.2.16

The consistent application of these principles implies a criticism also of
Schumpeter's views on the total value of a stock of goods. According to Wieser, the
total value of a stock of goods is given by multiplying the number of items or
portions constituting the stock by their marginal utility at any given moment. The
untenability of this argument is shown by the fact that it would prove that the total
stock of a free good must always be worth nothing. Schumpeter therefore suggests
a different formula in which each portion is multiplied by an index corresponding
to its position on the value scale (which, by the way, is quite arbitrary) and these
products are then added together or integrated. This attempt at a solution, like the
preceding, has the defect of assuming that it is possible to measure marginal utility
and "intensity" of value. The fact that such measurement is impossible renders both
suggestions equally useless. Mastery of the problem must be sought in some other
way.

I.2.17

Value is always the result of a process of valuation. The process of valuation
compares the significance of two complexes of commodities from the point of view
of the individual making the valuation. The individual making the valuation and the
complexes of goods valued, that is, the subject and the objects of the valuation,
must enter as indivisible elements into any given process of valuation. This does
not mean that they are necessarily indivisible in other respects as well, whether
physically or economically. The subject of an act of valuation may quite well be a
group of persons, a state or society or family, so long as it acts in this particular
case as a unit, through a representative. And the objects thus valued may be
collections of distinct units of commodities so long as they have to be dealt with in
this particular case as a whole. There is nothing to prevent either subject or object
from being a single unit for the purposes of one valuation even though in another
their component parts may be entirely independent of each other The same people
who, acting together through a representative as a single agent, such as a state,
make a judgment as to the relative values of a battleship and a hospital, are the
independent subjects of valuations of other commodities, such as cigars and
newspapers. It is just the same with commodities. Modern value theory is based on
the fact that it is not the abstract importance of different kinds of need that
determines the scales of values, but the intensity of specific desires. Starting from
this, the law of margina l utility was developed in a form that referred primarily to
the usual sort of case in which the collections of commodities are divisible. But
there are also cases in which the total supply must be valued as it stands.

I.2.18

Suppose that an economically isolated individual possesses two cows and three
horses and that the relevant part of his scale of values (that item valued highest
being placed first) is as follows: 1, a cow; 2, a horse; 3, a horse; 4,a horse; 5, a cow.
If this individual has to choose between one cow and one horse he will rather be
inclined to sacrifice the cow than the horse. If wild animals attack one of his cows
and one of his horses, and it is impossible for him to save both, then he will try to
save the horse. But if the whole of his stock of either animal is in danger, his
decision will be different. Supposing that his stable and cowshed catch fire and that
he can only rescue the occupants of one and must leave the others to their fate, then
if he values three horses less than two cows he will attempt to save not the three
horses but the two cows. The result of that process of valuation which involves a
choice between one cow and one horse is a higher estimation of the horse. The
result of the process of valuation which involves a choice between the whole
available stock of cows and the whole available stock of horses is a higher
estimation of the stock of cows.

I.2.19

Value can rightly be spoken of only with regard to specific acts of appraisal. It
exists in such connections only; there is no value outside the process of valuation.
There is no such thing as abstract value. Total value can be spoken of only with
reference to a particular instance of an individual or other valuing "subject" having
to choose between the total available quantities of certain economic goods. Like
every other act of valuation, this is complete in itself. The person making the
choice does not have to make use of notions about the value of units of the
commodity. His process of valuation, like every other, is an immediate inference
from considerations of the utilities at stake. When a stock is valued as a whole, its
marginal utility, that is to say, the utility of the last available unit of it, coincides
with its total utility, since the total supply is one indivisible quantity. This is also
true of the total value of free goods, whose separate units are always valueless, that
is, are always relegated to a sort of limbo at the very end of the value scale,
promiscuously intermingled with the units of all the other free goods.*17

I.2.20

3 Money as a Price Index
What has been said should have made sufficiently plain the unscientific nature of
the practice of attributing to money the function of acting as a measure of price or
even of value. Subjective value is not measured, but graded. The problem of the
measurement of objective use-value is not an economic problem at all. (It may
incidentally be remarked that a measurement of efficiency is not possible for every
species of commodity and is at the best only available within separate species,
while every possibility, not only of measurement, but even of mere scaled
comparison, vanishes as soon as we seek to establish a relation between two or
more kinds of efficiency. It may be possible to measure and compare the calorific
value of coal and of wood, but it is in no way possible to reduce to a common
objective denominator the objective efficiency of a table and that of a book.)

I.2.21

Neither is objective exchange value measurable, for it too is the result of the
comparisons derived from the valuations of individuals. The objective exchange
value of a given commodity unit may be expressed in units of every other kind of
commodity. Nowadays exchange is usually carried on by means of money, and
since every commodity has therefore a price expressible in money, the exchange
value of every commodity can be expressed in terms of money. This possibility
enabled money to become a medium for expressing values when the growing
elaboration of the scale of values which resulted from the development of exchange
necessitated a revision of the technique of valuation.

I.2.22

That is to say, opportunities for exchanging induce the individual to rearrange his
scales of values. A person in whose scale of values the commodity "a cask of wine"
comes after the commodity "a sack of oats" will reverse their order if he can
exchange a cask of wine in the market for a commodity that he values more highly
than a sack of oats. The position of commodities in the value scales of individuals
is no longer determined solely by their own subjective use-value, but also by the
subjective use-value of the commodities that can be obtained in exchange for them,
whenever the latter stand higher than the former in the estimation of the individual.
Therefore, if he is to obtain the maximum utility from his resources, the individual
must familiarize himself with all the prices in the market.
For this, however, he needs some help in finding his way among the confusing
multiplicity of the exchange ratios. Money, the common medium of exchange,
which can be exchanged for every commodity and with which every commodity
can be procured, is preeminently suitable for this. It would be absolutely
impossible for the individual, even if he were a complete expert in commercial
matters, to follow every change of market conditions and make the corresponding
alterations in his scale of use-values and exchange values, unless he chose some
common denominator to which he could reduce each exchange ratio. Because the
market enables any commodity to be turned into money and money into any
commodity, objective exchange value is expressed in terms of money. Thus money
becomes a price index, in Menger's phrase. The whole structure of the calculations
of the entrepreneur and the consumer rests on the process of valuing commodities
in money. Money has thus become an aid that the human mind is no longer able to
dispense with in making economic calculations.*18 If in this sense we wish to
attribute to money the function of being a measure of prices, there is no reason why
we should not do so. Nevertheless, it is better to avoid the use of a term which
might so easily be misunderstood as this. In any case the usage certainly cannot be
called correct—we do not usually describe the determination of latitude and
longitude as a "function" of the stars.*19

I.2.23

CHAPTER 3
The Various Kinds of Money
1 Money and Money Substitutes
When an indirect exchange is transacted with the aid of money, it is not necessary
for the money to change hands physically; a perfectly secure claim to an equivalent
sum, payable on demand, may be transferred instead of the actual coins. In this by
itself there is nothing remarkable or peculiar to money. What is peculiar, and only
to be explained by reference to the special characteristics of money; is the
extraordinary frequency of this way of completing monetary transactions.

I.3.1

In the first place, money is especially well adapted to constitute the substance of a
generic obligation. Whereas the fungibility of nearly all other economic goods is
more or less circumscribed and is often only a fiction based on an artificial
commercial terminology, that of money is almost unlimited. Only that of shares
and bonds can be compared with it. The sole factor that could possibly prevent any
of these from being completely fungible is the difficulty of sub-dividing their
separate units; and various expedients have been adopted, which, at least as far as
money is concerned, have entirely robbed this difficulty of all practical
significance.

I.3.2

A still more important circumstance is involved in the nature of the function that
money performs. A claim to money may be transferred over and over again in an
indefinite number of indirect exchanges without the person by whom it is payable
ever being called upon to settle it. This is obviously not true as far as other
economic goods are concerned, for these are always destined for ultimate
consumption.

I.3.3

The special suitability for facilitating indirect exchanges possessed by absolutely
secure and immediately payable claims to money, which we may briefly refer to as
money substitutes, is further increased by their standing in law and commerce.

I.3.4

Technically, and in some countries legally as well, the transfer of a banknote
scarcely differs from that of a coin. The similarity of outward appearance is such
that those who are engaged in commercial dealings are usually unable to
distinguish between those objects that actually perform the function of money and
those that are merely employed as substitutes for them. The businessman does not
worry about the economic problems involved in this; he is only concerned with the
commercial and legal characteristics of coins, notes, checks, and the like. To him,
the facts that banknotes are transferable without documentary evidence, that they
circulate like coins in round denominations, that no fight of recovery lies against
their previous holders, that the law recognizes no difference between them and
money as an instrument of debt settlement, seem good enough reason for including
them within the definition of the term money, and for drawing a fundamental
distinction between them and cash deposits, which can be transferred only by a
procedure that is much more complex technic ally and is also regarded in law as of
a different kind. This is the origin of the popular conception of money by which
everyday life is governed. No doubt it serves the purposes of the bank official, and
it may even be quite useful in the business world at large, but its introduction into
the scientific terminology of economics is most undesirable.

I.3.5

The controversy about the concept of money is not exactly one of the most
satisfactory chapters in the history of our science. It is chiefly remarkable for the
smother of juristic and commercial technicalities in which it is enveloped and for

I.3.6

smother of juristic and commercial technicalities in which it is enveloped and for
the quite undeserved significance that has been attached to what is after all merely
a question of terminology. The solution of the question has been re garded as an
end in itself and it seems to have been completely forgotten that the real aim should
have been simply to facilitate further investigation. Such a discussion could not fail
to be fruitless.
In attempting to draw a line of division between money and those objects that
outwardly resemble it, we only need to bear in mind the goal of our investigation.
The present discussion aims at tracing the laws that determine the exchange ratio
between money and other economic goods. This and nothing else is the task of the
economic theory of money. Now our terminology must be suited to our problem. If
a particular group of objects is to be singled out from among all those that fulfill a
monetary function in commerce and, under the special name of money (which is to
be reserved to this group alone), sharply contrasted with the rest (to which this
name is denied), then this distinction must be made in a way that will facilitate the
further progress of the investigation.

I.3.7

It is considerations such as these that have led the present writer to give the name
of money substitutes and not that of money to those objects that are employed like
money in commerce but consist in perfectly secure and immediately convertible
claims to money.

I.3.8

Claims are not goods;*20 they are means of obtaining disposal over goods. This
determines their whole nature and economic significance. They themselves are not
valued directly, but indirectly; their value is derived from that of the economic
goods to which they refer. Two elements are involved in the valuation of a claim:
first, the value of the goods to whose possession it gives a right; and, second, the
greater or less probability that possession of the goods in question will actually be
obtained. Furthermore, if the claim is to come into force only after a period of time,
then consideration of this circumstance will constitute a third factor in its valuation.
The value on January 1 of a right to receive ten sacks of coal on December 31 of
the same year will be based not directly on the value of ten sacks of coal, but on the
value of ten sacks of coal to be delivered in a year's time. This sort of calculation is
a matter of common experience, as also is the fact that in reckoning the value of
claims their soundness or security is taken into account.

I.3.9

Claims to money are, of course, no exception. Those which are payable on demand,
if there is no doubt about their soundness and no expense connected with their
settlement, are valued just as highly as cash and tendered and accepted in the same
way as money.*21 Only claims of this sort—that is, claims that are payable on
demand, absolutely safe as far as human foresight goes, and perfectly liquid in the
legal sense—are for business purposes exact substitutes for the money to which
they refer. Other claims, of course, such as notes issued by banks of doubtful credit
or bills that are not yet mature, also enter into financial transactions and may just as
well be employed as general media of exchange. This, according to our
terminology, means that they are money. But then they are valued independently;
they are reckoned equivalent neither to the sums of money to which they refer nor
even to the worth of the rights that they embody. What the further special factors
are that help to determine their exchange value, we shall discover in the course of
our argument.

I.3.10

Of course it would be in no way incorrect if we attempted to include in our concept
of money those absolutely secure and immediately convertible claims to money
that we have preferred to call money substitutes. But what must be entirely
condemned is the widespread practice of giving the name of money to certain

I.3.11

condemned is the widespread practice of giving the name of money to certain
classes of money substitutes, usually banknotes, token money, and the like, and
contrasting them sharply with the remaining kinds, such as cash deposits.*22 This is
to make a distinction without any adequate difference; for banknotes, say, and cash
deposits differ only in mere externals, important perhaps from the business and
legal points of view, but quite insignificant from the point of view of economics.
On the other hand, arguments of considerable weight may be urged in favor of
including all money substitutes without exception in the single concept of money.
It may be pointed out, for instance, that the significance of perfectly secure and
liquid claims to money is quite different from that of claims to other economic
goods; that whereas a claim on a commodity must sooner or later be liquidated, this
is not necessarily true of claims to money. Such claims may pass from hand to
hand for indefinite periods and so take the place of money without any attempt
being made to liquidate them. It may be pointed out that those who require money
will be quite satisfied with such claims as these, and that those who wish to spend
money will find that these claims answer their purpose just as well; and that
consequently the supply of money substitutes must be reckoned in with that of
money, and the demand for them with the demand for money. It may further be
pointed out that whereas it is impossible to satisfy an increase in the demand, say,
for bread by issuing more breadtickets without adding to the actual supply of bread
itself, it is perfectly possible to satisfy an increased demand for money by just such
a process as this. It may be argued, in brief, that money substitutes have certain
peculiarities of which account is best taken by including them in the concept of
money.

I.3.12

Without wishing to question the weight of such arguments as these, we shall on
grounds of convenience prefer to adopt the narrower formulation of the concept of
money, supplementing it with a separate concept of money substitutes. Whether
this is the most advisable course to pursue, whether perhaps some other procedure
might not lead to a better understanding of our subject matter, must be left to the
judgment of the reader To the author it appears that the way chosen is the only way
in which the difficult problems of the theory of money can be solved.

I.3.13

2 The Peculiarities of Money Substitutes
Economic discussion about money must be based solely on economic
considerations and may take legal distinctions into account only insofar as they are
significant from the economic point of view also. Such discussion consequently
must proceed from a concept of money based, not on legal definitions and
discriminations, but on the economic nature of things. It follows that our decision
not to regard drafts and other claims to money as constituting money itself must not
be interpreted merely in accordance with the narrow juristic concept of a claim to
money. Besides strictly legal claims to money, we must also take into account such
relationships as are not claims in the juristic sense, but are nevertheless treated as
such in commercial practice because some concern or other deals with them as if
they actually did constitute claims against itself.*23

I.3.14

There can be no doubt that the German token coins minted in accordance with the
Coinage Act of July 9, 1873, did not in law constitute claims to money. Perhaps
there are some superficial critics who would be inclined to classify these coins
actually as money because they consisted of stamped silver or nickel or copper
discs that had every appearance of being money. But despite this, from the point of
view of economics these token coins merely constituted drafts on the national
Treasury. The second paragraph of section nine of the Coinage Act (in its form of
June 1, 1909) obliged the Bundesrat to specify those centers that would pay out

I.3.15

June 1, 1909) obliged the Bundesrat to specify those centers that would pay out
gold coins on demand in return for not less than 200 marks' worth of silver coins or
fifty marks' worth of nickel and copper coins. Certain branches of the Reichsbank
were entrusted with this function. Another section of the Coinage Act (sec. 8)
provided that the Reich would always be in a position actually to maintain this
convertibility. According to this section, the total value of the silver coins minted
was never to exceed twenty marks per head of the populatio n, nor that of the nickel
and copper coins two and one-half marks per head. In the opinion of the legislature,
these sums represented the demand for small coins, and there was consequently no
danger that the total issue of token coinage would exceed the public demand for it.
Admittedly, there was no statutory recognition of any right to conversion on the
part of holders of token coins, and the limitation of legal tender (sec. 9, par 1) was
only an inadequate substitute for this. Nevertheless, it is a matter of general
knowledge that the token coins were in fact cashed without any demur at the
branches of the Reichsbank specified by the chancellor
Exactly the same sort of significance was enjoyed by the Reich Treasury notes, of
which not more than 120 million marks' worth were allowed to be in circulation.
These also (sec. 5 of the act of April 30, 1874) were always cashed for gold by the
Reichsbank on behalf of the Treasury. It is beside the point that the Treasury notes
were not legal tender in pr ivate transactions while everybody was obliged to accept
silver coins in amounts up to twenty marks and nickel and copper coins in amounts
up to one mark; for, although they were not legally bound to accept them in
settlement of debts, people in fact accepted them readily.

I.3.16

Another example is afforded by the German thaler of the period from the
introduction of the gold standard until the withdrawal of the thaler from circulation
on October 1, 1907. During the whole of this period the thaler was undoubtedly
legal tender But if we seek to go behind this expression, whose juristic derivation
makes it useless for our present purpose, and ask if the thaler was money during
this period, the answer must be that it was not. It is true that it was employed in
commerce as a medium of exchange; but it could be used in this way solely
because it was a claim to something that really was money, that is, to the common
medium of exchange. For although neither the Reichsbank nor the Reich nor its
separate constituent kingdoms and duchies nor anybody else was obliged to cash
them, the Reichsbank, acting on behalf of the government, always took pains to
ensure that no more thalers were in circulation than were demanded by the public.
It achieved this result by refusing to press thalers on its customers when paying out.
This, together with the circumstance that thalers were legal tender both to the bank
and to the Reich, was sufficient to turn them in effect into drafts that could always
be converted into money, with the result that they circulated at home as perfectly
satisfactory substitutes for money. It was repeatedly suggested to the directors of
the Reichsbank that they should cash their own notes not in gold but in thalers
(which would have been well within the letter of the law) and pay out gold only at
a premium, with the object of hindering the export of it. But the bank steadily
refused to adopt this or any proposal of a similar nature.

I.3.17

The exact nature of the token coinage in other countries has not always been so

I.3.18

restriction of the amount that may be minted.
There is no such thing as an economic concept of token coinage. All that
economics can distinguish is a particular subgroup within the group of claims to
money that are employed as substitutes for money, the members of this subgroup
being intended for use in transactions where the amounts involved are small. The
fact that the issue and circulation of token coins are subjected to special legal rules
and regulations is to be explained by the special nature of the purpose that they
serve. The general recognition of the right of the holder of a banknote to receive
money in exchange for it while the conversion of token coins is in many countrie s
left to administrative discretion is a result of the different lines of development that
notes and token coinage have followed respectively. Token coins have arisen from
the need for facilitating the exchange of small quantities of goods of little value.
The historical details of their development have not yet been brought to light and,
almost without exception, all that has been written on the subject is of purely
numismatical or metrological importance.*24 Nevertheless, one thing can safely be
asserted: token coinage is always the result of attempts to remedy deficiencies in
the existing monetary system. It is those technical difficulties, that hinder the
subdivision of the monetary unit into small coins, that have led, after all sorts of
unsuccessful attempts, to the solution of the problem that we adopt nowadays. In
many countries, while this development has been going on, a kind of fiat money*25
has sometimes been used in small transactions, with the very inconvenient
consequence of having two independent kinds of money performing side by side
the function of a common medium of exchange. To avoid the inconveniences of
such a situation the small coins were brought into a fixed legal ratio with those
used in larger transactions and the necessary precautions were taken to prevent the
quantity of small coins from exceeding the requirements of commerce. The most
important means to this end has always been the restriction of the quantity minted
to that which seems likely to be needed for making small payments, whether this is
fixed by law or strictly adhered to without such compulsion. Along with this has
gone the limitation of legal tender in private dealings to a certain relatively small
amount. The danger that these regulations would prove inadequate has never
seemed very great, and consequently legislative provision for conversion of the
token coins has been either entirely neglected or left incomplete by omission of a
clear statement of the holder's right to change them for money. But everywhere
nowadays those token coins that are rejected from circulation are accepted without
demur by the state, or some other body such as the central bank, and thus their
nature as claims to money is established. Where this policy has been discontinued
for a time and the attempt made by suspending effectual conversion of the token
coins to force more of them into circulation than was required, they have become
credit money, or even commodity money. Then they have no longer been regarded
as claims to money, payable on demand, and therefore equivalent to money, but
have been valued independently.

I.3.19

The banknote has followed quite a different line of development. It has always
been regarded as a claim, even from the juristic point of view. The fact has never
been lost sight of that if its value was to be kept equal to that of money, steps
would have to be taken to ensure its permanent convertibility into money. That a
cessation of cash payments would alter the economic character of banknotes could
hardly escape notice; in the case of the quantitatively less important coins used in
small transactions it could more easily be forgotten. Furthermore, the smaller
quantitative importance of token coins means that it is possible to maintain their
permanent convertibility without establishing special funds for the purpose. The
absence of such special funds may also have helped to disguise the real nature of
token coinage.*26

I.3.20

Consideration of the monetary system of Austria -Hungary is particularly
instructive. The currency reform that was inaugurated in 1892 was never formally
completed, and until the disruption of the Hapsburg monarchy the standard
remained legally what is usually called a paper standard, since the AustroHungarian Bank was not obliged to redeem its own notes, which were legal tender
to any amount. Nevertheless, from 1900 to 1914 Austria -Hungary really possessed
a gold standard or gold-exchange standard, for the bank did in fact readily provide
gold for commercial requirements. Although according to the letter of the law it
was not obliged to cash its notes, it offered bills of exchange and other claims
payable abroad in gold (checks, notes, and the like), at a price below the upper
theoretical gold point. Under such conditions, those who wanted gold for export
naturally preferred to buy claims of this sort, which enabled them to achieve their
purpose more cheaply than by the actual export of gold.

I.3.21

For internal commerce as well, in which the use of gold was exceptional since the
population had many years before gone over to banknotes and token coins,*27 the
bank cashed its notes for gold without being legally bound to do so. And this policy
was pursued, not accidentally or occasionally or without full recognition of its
significance, but deliberately and systematically, with the object of permitting
Austria and Hungary to enjoy the economic advantages of the gold standard. Both
the Austrian and the Hungarian governments, to whose initiative this policy of the
bank was due, cooperated as far as they were able. But in the first place it was the
bank itself which had to ensure, by following an appropriate discount policy, that it
would always be in a position to carry out with promptitude its voluntary
undertaking to redeem its notes. The measures that it took with this purpose in view
did not differ fundamentally in any way from those adopted by the banks-of-issue
in other gold-standard countries.*28 Thus the notes of the Austro-Hungarian Bank
were in fact nothing but money substitutes. The money of the country, as of other
European countries, was gold.

I.3.22

3 Commodity Money, Credit Money, and Fiat Money
The economic theory of money is generally expressed in a terminology that is not
economic but juristic. This terminology has been built up by writers, statesmen,
merchants, judges, and others whose chief interests have been in the legal
characteristics of the different kinds of money and their substitutes. It is useful for
dealing with those aspects of the monetary system that are of importance from the
legal point of view; but for purposes of economic investigation it is practically
valueless. Sufficient attention has scarcely been devoted to this shortcoming,
despite the fact that confusion of the respective provinces of the sciences of law
and economics has nowhere been so frequent and so fraught with mischievous
consequences as in this very sphere of monetary theory. It is a mistake to deal with
economic problems according to legal criteria. The juristic phraseology, like the
results of juristic research into monetary problems, must be regarded by economics

I.3.23

results of juristic research into monetary problems, must be regarded by economics
as one of the objects of its investigations. It is not the task of economics to criticize
it, although it is entitled to exploit it for its own purposes. There is nothing to be
said against using juristic technical terms in economic argument where this leads to
no undesirable consequences. But for its own special purposes, economics must
construct its own special terminology.
There are two sorts of thing that may be used as money: on the one hand, physical
commodities as such, like the metal gold or the metal silver; and, on the other hand,
objects that do not differ technologically from other objects that are not money, the
factor that decides whether they are money being not a physical but a legal
characteristic. A piece of paper that is specially characterized as money by the
imprint of some authority is in no way different, technologically considered, from
another piece of paper that has received a similar imprint from an unauthorized
person, just as a genuine five-franc piece does not differ technologically from a
"genuine replica." The only difference lies in the law that regulates the manufacture
of such coins and makes it impossible without authority. (In order to avoid every
possible misunderstanding, let it be expressly stated that all that the law can do is to
regulate the issue of the coins and that it is beyond the power of the state to ensure
in addition that they actually shall become money; that is, that they actually shall
be employed as a common medium of exchange. All that the state can do by means
of its official stamp is to single out certain pieces of metal or paper from all the
other things of the same kind so that they can be subjected to a process of valuation
independent of that of the rest. Thus it permits those objects possessing the special
legal qualification to be used as a common medium of exchange while the other
commodities of the same sort remain mere commodities. It can also take various
steps with the object of encouraging the actual employment of the qualified
commodities as common media of exchange. But these commodities can never
become money just because the state commands it; money can be created only by
the usage of those who take part in commercial transactions.)

I.3.24

We may give the name commodity money to that sort of money that is at the same
time a commercial commodity; and the name fiat money to money that comprises
things with a special legal qualification. A third category may be called credit
money, this being that sort of money which constitutes a claim against any physical
or legal person. But these claims must not be both payable on demand and
absolutely secure; if they were, there could be no difference between their value
and that of the sum of money to which they referred, and they could not be
subjected to an independent process of val uation on the part of those who dealt
with them. In some way or other the maturity of these claims must be postponed to
some future time. It can hardly be contested that fiat money in the strict sense of
the word is theoretically conceivable. The theory of value proves the possibility of
its existence. Whether fiat money has ever actually existed is, of course, another
question, and one that cannot offhand be answered affirmatively. It can hardly be
doubted that most of those kinds of money that are not commodity money must be
classified as credit money. But only detailed historical investigation could clear this
matter up.

I.3.25

Our terminology should prove more useful than that which is generally employed.
It should express more clearly the peculiarities of the processes by which the
different types of money are valued. It is certainly more correct than the usual
distinction between metallic money and paper money. Metallic money comprises
not only standard money but also token coins and such coins as the German thaler
of the period 1873-1907; and paper money, as a rule, comprises not merely such
fiat money and credit money as happen to be made of paper, but also convertible
notes issued by banks or the state. This terminology is derived from popular usage.

I.3.26

notes issued by banks or the state. This terminology is derived from popular usage.
Previously, when more often than nowadays "metallic" money really was money
and not a money substitute, perhaps the nomenclature was a little less inappropriate than it is now. Furthermore, it corresponded—perhaps still
corresponds—to the naive and confused popular conception of value that sees in
the precious metals something "intrinsically" valuable and in paper credit money
something necessarily anomalous. Scientifically, this terminology is perfectly
useless and a source of endless misunderstanding and misrepresentation. The
greatest mistake that can be made in economic investigation is to fix attention on
mere appearances, and so to fail to perceive the fundamental difference between
things whose externals alone are similar, or to discriminate between fundamentally
similar things whose externals alone are different.
Admittedly, for the numismatist and the technologist and the historian of art there
is very little difference between the five-franc piece before and after the cessation
of free coinage of silver, while the Austria n silver gulden even of the period 1879
to 1892 appears to be fundamentally different from the paper gulden. But it is
regrettable that such superficial distinctions as this should still play a part in
economic discussion.

I.3.27

Our threefold classification is not a matter of mere terminological gymnastics; the
theoretical discussion of the rest of this book should demonstrate the utility of the
concepts that it involves.

I.3.28

The decisive characteristic of commodity money is the employment for monetary
purposes of a commodity in the technological sense. For the present investigation,
it is a matter of complete indifference what particular commodity this is; the
important thing is that it is the commodity in question that constitutes the money,
and that the money is merely this commodity. The case of fiat money is quite
different. Here the deciding factor is the stamp, and it is not the material bearing
the stamp that constitutes the money, but the stamp itself. The nature of the
material that bears the stamp is a matter of quite minor importance. Credit money,
finally, is a claim falling due in the future that is used as a general medium of
exchange.

I.3.29

4 The Commodity Money of the Past and of the Present
Even when the differentiation of commodity money, credit money, and fiat money
is accepted as correct in principle and only its utility disputed, the statement that
the freely mintable currency of the present day and the metallic money of previous
centuries are examples of commodity money is totally rejected by many authorities
and by still more of the public at large. It is true that as a rule nobody denies that
the older forms of money were commodity money. It is further generally admitted
that in earlier times coins circulated by weight and not by tale. Nevertheless, it is
asserted, money changed its nature long ago. The money of Germany and England
in 1914, it is said, was not gold, but the mark and the pound. Money nowadays
consists of "specified units with a definite significance in terms of value, that is
assigned to them by law" (Knapp). "By 'the standard' we mean the units of value
(florins, francs, marks, etc.) that have been adopted as measures of value, and by
'money' we mean the tokens (coins and notes) that represent the units that function
as a measure of value. The controversy as to whether silver or gold or both together
should function as a standard and as currency is an idle one, because neither silver
nor gold ever has performed these functions or ever could have done so"
(Hammer).*29

I.3.30

Before we proceed to test the truth of these remarkable assertions, let us make one
brief observation on their genesis—although it would really be more correct to say
renascence than to say genesis, since the doctrines involved exhibit a very close
relationship with the oldest and most primitive theories of money. Just as these
were, so the nominalistic monetary theories of the present day are, characterized by
their inability to contribute a single word toward the solution of the chief problem
of monetary theory—one might in fact simply call it the problem of monetary
theory—namely that of explaining the exchange ratios between money and other
economic goods. For their authors, the economic problem of value and prices
simply does not exist. They have never thought it necessary to consider how
market ratios are established or what they signify. Their attention is accidentally
drawn to the fact that a German thaler (since 1873), or an Austrian silver florin
(since 1879), is essentially different from a quantity of silver of the same weight
and fineness that has not been stamped at the government mint. They notice a
similar state of affairs with regard to "paper money." They do not understand this,
and endeavor to find an answer to the riddle. But at this point, just because of their
lack of acquaintance with the theory of value and prices, their inquiry takes a
peculiarly unlucky turn. They do not inquire how the exchange ratios between
money and other economic goods are established. This obviously seems to them
quite a self-evident matter. They formulate their problem in another way: How does
it come about that three twenty-mark pieces are equivalent to twenty thalers
despite the fact that the silver contained in the thalers has a lower market value
than the gold contained in the marks? And their answer runs: Because the value of
money is determined by the state, by statute, by the legal system. Thus, ignoring the
most important facts of monetary history, they weave an artificial network of
fallacies; a theoretical construction that collapses immediately the question is put:
What exactly are we to understand by a unit of value? But such impertinent
questions can only occur to those who are acquainted with at least the elements of
the theory of prices. Others are able to content themselves with references to the
"nominality" of the unit of value. No wonder, then, that these theories should have
achieved such popularity with the man in the street, especially since their kinship
with inflationism was bound to commend them strongly to all "cheap-money"
enthusiasts.

I.3.31

It may be stated as an assured result of investigation into monetary history that at
all times and among all peoples the principal coins have been tendered and
accepted, not by tale without consideration of their quantity and quality, but only as
pieces of metal of specific degrees of weight and fineness. Where coins have been
accepted by tale, this has always been in the definite belief that the stamp showed
them to be of the usual fineness of their kind and of the correct weight. Where there
were no grounds for this assumption, weighing and testing were resorted to again.

I.3.32

Fiscal considerations have led to the promulgation of a theory that attributes to the
minting authority the right to regulate the purchasing power of the coinage as it
thinks fit. For just as long as the minting of coins has been a government function,
governments have trie d to fix the weight and content of the coins as they wished.
Philip VI of France expressly claimed the right "to mint such money and give it
such currency and at such rate as we desire and seems good to us"*30 and all
medieval rulers thought and did as he in this matter. Obliging jurists supported
them by attempts to discover a philosophical basis for the divine right of kings to
debase the coinage and to prove that the true value of the coins was that assigned to
them by the ruler of the country.

I.3.33

Nevertheless, in defiance of all official regulations and prohibitions and fixing of
prices and threats of punishment, commercial practice has always insisted that what
has to be considered in valuing coins is not their face value but their value as metal.

I.3.34

has to be considered in valuing coins is not their face value but their value as metal.
The value of a coin has always been determined, not by the image and
superscription it bears nor by the proclamation of the mint and market authorities,
but by its metal content. Not every kind of money has been accepted at sight, but
only those kinds with a good reputation for weight and fineness. In loan contracts,
repayment in specific kinds of money has been stipulated for, and in the case of a
change in the coinage, fulfillment in terms of metal required. *31 In spite of all fiscal
influences, the opinion gradually gained general acceptance, even among the
jurists, that it was the metal value—the bonitas intrinseca as they called it—that
was to be considered when repaying money debts.*32
Debasement of the coinage was unable to force commercial practice to attribute to
the new and lighter coins the same purchasing power as the old and heavier coins.*33
The value of the coinage fell in proportion to the diminution of its weight and
quality. Even price regulations took into account the diminished purchasing power
of money due to its debasement. Thus the Schöffen or assessors of Schweidnitz in
Silesia used to have the newly minted pfennigs submitted to them, assess their
value, and then in consultation with the city council and elders fix the prices of
commodities accordingly. There has been handed down to us from thirteenthcentury Vienna a forma institutionis que fit per civium arbitrium annuatim tempore
quo denarii renovantur pro rerum venalium qualibet emptione in which the prices
of commodities and services are regulated in connection with the introduction of a
new coinage in the years 1460 to 1474. Similar measures were taken on similar
occasions in other cities.*34

I.3.35

Wherever disorganization of the coinage had advanced so far that the presence of a
stamp on a piece of metal was no longer any help in determining its actual content,
commerce ceased entirely to rely on the official monetary system and created its
own system of measuring the precious metals. In large transactions, ingots and
trade tokens were used. Thus, the German merchants visiting the fair at Geneva
took ingots of refined gold with them and made their purchases with these,
employing the weights used at the Paris market, instead of using money. This was
the origin of the Markenskudo or scutus marcharum, which was nothing but the
merchants' usual term for 3.765 grams of refined gold. At the beginning of the
fifteenth century, when the Geneva trade was gradually being transferred to Lyons,
the gold mark had become such a customary unit of account among the merchants
that bills of exchange expressed in terms of it were carried to and from the market.
The old Venetian lire di grossi had a similar origin. *35 In the giro banks that sprang
up in all big commercial centers at the beginning of the modern era we see a further
attempt to free the monetary syste m from the authorities' abuse of the privilege of
minting. The clearinghouse business of these banks was based either on coins of a
specific fineness or on ingots. This bank money was commodity money in its most
perfect form.

I.3.36

The nominalists assert that the monetary unit, in modern countries at any rate, is
not a concrete commodity unit that can be defined in suitable technical terms, but a
nominal quantity of value about which nothing can be said except that it is created
by law. Without touchin g upon the vague and nebulous nature of this phraseology,
which will not sustain a moment's criticism from the point of view of the theory of
value, let us simply ask: What, then, were the mark, the franc, and the pound before
1914? Obviously, they were nothing but certain weights of gold. Is it not mere
quibbling to assert that Germany had not a gold standard but a mark standard?
According to the letter of the law, Germany was on a gold standard, and the mark
was simply the unit of account, the designation of 1/2790 kg. of refined gold. This
is in no way affected by the fact that nobody was bound in private dealings to
accept gold ingots or foreign gold coins, for the whole aim and intent of state

I.3.37

accept gold ingots or foreign gold coins, for the whole aim and intent of state
intervention in the monetary sphere is simply to release individuals from the
necessity of testing the weight and fineness of the gold they receive, a task which
can only be undertaken by experts and which involves very elaborate precautionary
measures. The narrowness of the limits within which the weight and fineness of the
coins are legally allowed to vary at the time of minting, and the establishment of a
further limit to the permissible loss by wear of those in circulation, are much better
means of securing the integrity of the coinage than the use of scales and nitric acid
on the part of all who have commercial dealings. Again, the right of free coinage,
one of the basic principles of modern monetary law, is a protection in the opposite
direction against the emergence of a difference in value between the coined and
uncoined metal. In large-scale international trade, where differences that are
negligible as far as single coins are concerned have a cumulative importance, coins
are valued, not according to their number, but according to their weight; that is,
they are treated not as coins but as pieces of metal. It is easy to see why this does
not occur in domestic trade. Large payments within a country never involve the
actual transfer of the amounts of money concerned, but merely the assignment of
claims, which ult imately refer to the stock of precious metal of the central bank.
The role played by ingots in the gold reserves of the banks is a proof that the
monetary standard consists in the precious metal, and not in the proclamation of the
authorities.
Even for present-day coins, so far as they are not money substitutes, credit money,
or fiat money, the statement is true that they are nothing but ingots whose weight
and fineness are officially guaranteed. *36 The money of those modern countries
where metal coins with no mint restrictions are used is commodity money just as
much as that of ancient and medieval nations.

I.3.38

CHAPTER 4
Money and the State
1 The Position of the State in the Market
The position of the state in the market differs in no way from that of any other
parties to commercial transactions. Like these others, the state exchanges
commodities and money on terms which are governed by the laws of price. It
exercises its sovereign rights over its subjects to levy compulsory contributions
from them; but in all other respects it adapts itself like everybody else to the
commercial organization of society. As a buyer or seller the state has to conform to
the conditions of the market. If it wishes to alter any of the exchange ratios
established in the market, it can only do this through the market's own mechanism.
As a rule it will be able to act more effectively than anyone else, thanks to the
resources at its command outside the market. It is responsible for the most
pronounced disturbances of the market because it is able to exercise the strongest
influence on demand and supply. But it is nonetheless subject to the rules of the
market and cannot set aside the laws of the pricing process. In an economic system
based on private ownership of the means of production, no government regulation
can alter the terms of exchange except by altering the factors that determine them.

I.4.1

Kings and republics have repeatedly refused to recognize this. Diocletian's edict de
pretiis rerum venalium, the price regulations of the Middle Ages, and the
maximum prices of the French Revolution are the most well-known examples of
the failure of authoritative interference with the market. These attempts at
intervention were not frustrated by the fact that they were valid only within the
state boundaries and ignored elsewhere. It is a mistake to imagine that similar
regulations would have led to the desired result even in an isolated state. It was the
functional, not the geographical, limitations of the government that rendered them
abortive. They could have achieved their aim only in a socialistic state with a
centralized organization of production and distribution. In a state that leaves
production and distribution to individual enterprise, such measures must
necessarily fail of their effect.

I.4.2

The concept of money as a creature of law and the state is clearly untenable. It is
not justified by a single phenomenon of the market. To ascribe to the state the
power of dictating the laws of exchange, is to ignore the fundamental principles of
money-using society.

I.4.3

2 The Legal Concept of Money
When both parties to an exchange fulfill their obligations immediately and
surrender a commodity for ready cash, there is usually no motive for the judicial
intervention of the state. But when the exchange is one of present goods against
future goods it may happen that one party fails to fulfill his obligations although
the other has carried out his share of the contract. Then the judiciary may be
invoked. If the case is one of lending or purchase on credit, to name only the most
important examples, the court has to decide how a debt contracted in terms of
money can be liquidated. Its task thus becomes that of determining, in accordance
with the intent of the contracting parties, what is to be understood by money in
commercial transactions. From the legal point of view, money is not the common
medium of exchange, but the common medium of payment or debt settlement. But
money only becomes a medium of payment by virtue of being a medium of
exchange. And it is only because it is a medium of exchange that the law also

I.4.4

exchange. And it is only because it is a medium of exchange that the law also
makes it the medium for fulfilling obligations not contracted in terms of money,
but whose literal fulfillment is for some reason or other impossible.
The fact that the law regards money only as a means of canceling outstanding
obligations has important consequences for the legal definition of money. What the
law understands by money is in fact not the common medium of exchange but the
legal medium of payment. It does not come within the scope of the legislator or
jurist to define the economic concept of money.

I.4.5

In determining how monetary debts may be effectively paid off there is no reason
for being too exclusive. It is customary in business to tender and accept in payment
certain money substitutes instead of money itself. If the law refused to recognize
the validity of money substitutes that are sanctioned by commercial usage, it would
only open the door to all sorts of fraud and deceit. This would offend against the
principle malitiis non est indulgendum. Besides this, the payment of small sums
would, for technical reasons, hardly be possible without the use of token money.
Even ascribing the power of debt settlement to banknotes does not injure creditors
or other recipients in any way, so long as the notes are regarded by the
businessman as equivalent to money.

I.4.6

But the state may ascribe the power of debt settlement to other objects as well. The
law may declare anything it likes to be a medium of payment, and this ruling will
be binding on all courts and on all those who enforce the decisions of the courts.
But bestowing the property of legal tender on a thing does not suffice to make it
money in the economic sense. Goods can become common media of exchange only
through the practice of those who take part in commercial transactions; and it is the
valuations of these persons alone that determine the exchange ratios of the market.
Quite possibly, commerce may take into use those things to which the state has
ascribed the power of payment; but it need not do so. It may, if it likes, reject them.

I.4.7

Three situations are possible when the state has declared an object to be a legal
means of fulfilling an outstanding obligation. First, the legal means of payment
may be identical with the medium of exchange that the contracting parties had in
mind when entering into their agreement; or, if not identical, it may yet be of equal
value with this medium at the time of payment. For example, the state may
proclaim gold as a legal medium for settling obligations contracted in terms of
gold, or, at a time when the relative values of gold and silver are as 1 to 15½, it
may declare that liabilities in terms of gold may be settled by payment of 15½
times the quantity of silver. Such an arrangement is merely the legal formulation of
the presumable intent of the agreement. It damages the interests of neither party. It
is economically neutral.

I.4.8

The case is otherwise when the state proclaims as medium of payment something
that has a higher or lower value than the contractual medium. The first possibility
may be disregarded; but the second, of which numerous historical examples could
be cited, is important. From the legal point of view, in which the fundamental
principle is the protection of vested rights, such a procedure on the part of the state
can never be justified, although it might sometimes be vindicated on social or fiscal
grounds. But it always means, not the fulfillment of obligations, but their complete
or partial cancellation. When notes that are appraised commercially at only half
their face value are proclaimed legal tender, this amounts fundamentally to the
same thing as granting debtors legal relief from half of their liabilities.

I.4.9

State declarations of legal tender affect only those monetary obligations that have
already been contracted. But commerce is free to choose between retaining its old

I.4.10

already been contracted. But commerce is free to choose between retaining its old
medium of exchange or creating a new one for itself, and when it adopts a new
medium, so far as the legal power of the contracting parties reaches, it will attempt
to make it into a standard of deferred payments also, in order to deprive of its
validity, at least for the future, the standard to which the state has ascribed
complete powers of debt settlement. When, during the last decade of the nineteenth
century, the bimetallist party in Germany gained so much power that the possibility
of experiment with its inflationist proposals had to be reckoned with, gold clauses
began to make their appearance in long-term contracts. The recent period of
currency depreciation has had a similar effect. If the state does not wish to render
all credit transactions impossible, it must recognize such devices as these and
instruct the courts to acknowledge them. And, similarly, when the state itself enters
into ordinary business dealings, when it buys or sells, guarantees loans or borrows,
makes payments or receives them, it must recognize the common business medium
of exchange as money. The legal standard, the particular group of things that are
endued with the property of unlimited legal tender, is in fact valid only for the
settlement of existing debts, unless business usage itself adopts it as a general
medium of exchange.
3 The Influence of the State on the Monetary System
State activity in the monetary sphere was originally restricted to the manufacture of
coins. To supply ingots of the greatest possible degree of similarity in appearance,
weight, and fineness, and provide them with a stamp that was not too easy to
imitate and that could be recognized by everybody as the sign of the state coinage,
was and still is the premier task of state monetary activity. Beginning with this, the
influence of the state in the monetary sphere has gradually extended.

I.4.11

Progress in monetary technique has been slow. At first, the impression on a coin
was merely a proof of the genuineness of its material, including its degree of
fineness, while the weight had to be separately checked at each payment. (In the
present state of knowledge this cannot be stated dogmatically; and in any case the
development is not likely to have followed the same lines everywhere.) Later,
different kinds of coins were distinguished, all the separate coins of any particular
kind being regarded as interchangeable. The next step after the innovation of
classified money. was the development of the parallel standard. This consisted in

I.4.12

the state's influence on commercial usage, both potential and actual, has increased.
It has increased, first, because the state's own importance as an economic agent has
increased; because it occupies a greater place as buyer and seller as payer of wages
and levier of taxes, than in past centuries. In this there is nothing that is remarkable
or that needs special emphasis. It is obvious that the influence of an economic
agent on the choice of a monetary commodity will be the greater in proportion to
its share in the dealings of the market; and there is no reason to suppose that there
should be any difference in the case of the one particular economic agent, the state.
But, besides this, the state exercises a special influence on the choice of the
monetary commodity, which is due not to its commercial position nor to its
authority as legislator and judge, but to its official standing as controller of the mint
and to its power to change the character of the money substitutes in circulation.

I.4.13

The influence of the state on the monetary system is usually that ascribed to its
legislative and judicial authority. It is assumed that the law, which can
authoritatively alter the tenor of existing debt relations and force new contracts of
indebtedness in a particular direction, enables the state to exercise a deciding
influence in the choice of the commercial medium of exchange.

I.4.14

Nowadays the most extreme form of this argument is to be found in Knapp's State
Theory of Money;*37 but very few German writers are completely free from it.
Helfferich may be mentioned as an example. It is true that this writer declares, with
regard to the origin of money, that it is perhaps doubtful whether it was not the
function of common medium of exchange alone that sufficed to make a thing
money and to make money the standard of deferred payments of every kind.
Nevertheless, he constantly regards it as quite beyond any sort of doubt that for our
present economic organization certain kinds of money in some countries, and the
whole monetary system in other countries, are money, and function as a medium of
exchange, only because compulsory payments and obligations contracted in terms
of money must or may be fulfilled in terms of these particular objects.*38

I.4.15

It would be difficult to agree with views of this nature. They fail to recognize the
meaning of state intervention in the monetary sphere. By declaring an object to be
fitted in the juristic sense for the liquidation of liabilities expressed in terms of
money, the state cannot influence the choice of a medium of exchange, which
belongs to those engaged in business. History shows that those states that have
wanted their subjects to accept a new monetary system have regularly chosen other
means than this of achieving their ends.

I.4.16

The establishment of a legal ratio for the discharge of obligations incurred under
the regime of the superseded kind of money constitutes a merely secondary
measure which is significant only in connection with the change of standard which
is achieved by other means. The provision that taxes are in future to be paid in the
new kind of money, and that other liabilities imposed in terms of money will be
fulfilled only in the new money, is a consequence of the transition to the new
standard. It proves effective only when the new kind of money has become a
common medium of exchange in commerce generally. A monetary policy can
never be carrie d out merely by legislative means, by an alteration in the legal
definitions of the content of contracts of indebtedness and of the system of public
expenditure; it must be based on the executive authority of the state as controller of
the mint and as issuer of claims to money, payable on demand, that can take the
place of money in commerce. The necessary measures must not merely be
passively recorded in the protocols of legislative assemblies and official gazettes,
but—often at great financial sacrifice—must be actually put into operation.

I.4.17

A country that wishes to persuade its subjects to go over from one precious-metal
standard to another cannot rest content with expressing this aspiration in
appropriate provisions of the civil and fiscal law. It must make the new money take
the commercial place of the old. Exactly the same is true of the transition from a
credit-money or fiat-money standard to commodity money. No statesman faced
with the task of such a change has ever had even a momentary doubt about the
matter. It is not the enactment of a legal ratio and the order that taxes are to be paid
in the new money that are the decisive steps, but the provision of the necessary
quantity of the new money and the withdrawal of the old.

I.4.18

This may be confirmed by a few historical examples. First, the impossibility of
modifying the monetary system merely by the exercise of authority may be
illustrated by the ill success of bimetallistic legislation. This was once thought to
offer a simple solution of a big problem. For thousands of years, gold and silver
had been employed side by side as commodity money; but the continuance of this
practice had constantly grown more burdensome, for the parallel standard, or
simultaneous employment as currency of two kinds of commodity, has many
disadvantages. Since no spontaneous assistance was to be expected from the
individuals engaged in business, the state decided to intervene in the hope of
cutting the Gordian knot. Just as it had previously removed certain obvio us
difficulties by declaring that debts contracted in terms of thalers might be
discharged by payment of twice as many half-thalers or four times as many quarterthalers, so it now proceeded to establish a fixed ratio between the two different
precious metals. Debts payable in silver, for instance, could be discharged by
payment of 1 : 15½ times the same weight of gold. It was thought that this had
solved the problem, while in fact the difficulties that it involved had not even been
suspected; as events were to prove. All the results followed that are attributed by
Gresham's law to the legislative equating of coins of unequal value. In all debt
settlements and similar payments, only that money was used which the law rated
more highly than the market. When the law had happened to hit upon the existing
market ratio as its par, then this effect was delayed a little until the next movement
in the prices of the precious metals. But it was bound to occur as soon as a
difference arose between the legislative and the market ratios of the two kinds of
money. The parallel standard was thus turned, not into a double standard, as the
legislators had intended, but into an alternative standard.

I.4.19

The primary result of this was a decision, for a little while at least, between the two
precious metals. Not that this was what the state had intended. On the contrary, the
state had no thought whatever of deciding in favor of the use of one or the other
metal; it had hoped to secure the circulation of both. But the officia l regulation,
which in declaring the reciprocal substitutability of gold and silver money
overestimated the market ratio of the one in terms of the other, merely succeeded in
differentiating the utility of the two for monetary purposes. The consequence was
the increased employment of one of the metals and the disappearance of the other.
The legislative and judicial intervention of the state had completely failed. It had
been demonstrated, in striking fashion, that the state alone could not make a
commodity into a common medium of exchange, that is, into money, but that this
could be done only by the common action of all the individuals engaged in
business.

I.4.20

But what the state fails to achieve through legislative means may be to a certain
degree within its power as controller of the mint. It was in the latter capacity that
the state intervened when the alternative standard was replaced by permanent
monometallism. This happened in various ways. The transition was quite simple
and easy when the action of the state consisted in preventing a return to the
temporarily undervalued metal in one of the alternating monometallic periods by

I.4.21

temporarily undervalued metal in one of the alternating monometallic periods by
rescinding the fight of free coinage. The matter was even simpler in those countries
where one or the other metal had gained the upper hand before the state had
reached the stage necessary for the modern type of regulation, so that all that
remained for the law to do was to sanction a situation that was already established.
The problem was much more difficult when the state attempted to persuade
businessmen to abandon the metal that was being used and adopt the other. In this
case, the state had to manufacture the necessary quantity of the new metal,
exchange it for the old currency, and either turn the metal thus withdrawn from
circulation into token coinage or sell it for nonmonetary use or for recoinage
abroad. The reform of the German monetary system after the foundation of the
Reich in 1871 may be regarded as a perfect example of the transition from one
metallic commodity standard to another. The difficulties that this involved, and that
were overcome by the help of the French war indemnity, are well known. They
were involved in the performance of two tasks—the provision of the gold and the
disposal of the silver. This and nothing else was the essence of the problem that
had to be solved when the decision was taken to change the standard. The Reich
completed the transition to gold by giving gold and claims to gold in exchange for
the silver money and claims to silver money held by its citizens. The corresponding
alterations in the law were mere accompaniments of the change.*39

I.4.22

The change of standard occurred in just the same way in Austria -Hungary, Russia,
and the other countries that reformed their monetary systems in the succeeding
years. Here also the problem was merely that of providing the requisite quantities
of gold and setting them in circulation among those engaged in business in place of
the media previously employed. This process was extraordinarily facilitated and,
what was even more to the point, the amount of gold necessary for the changeover
was considerably decreased, by the device of permitting the coins constituting the
old fiat money or credit money to remain wholly or partly in circulation, while
fundamentally changing their economic character by transforming them into claims
that were always convertible into the new kind of money. This gave a different
outward appearance to the transaction, but it remained in essence the same. It is
scarcely open to question that the steps taken by those countries that adopted this
kind of monetary policy consisted essentially in the provision of quantities of
metal.

I.4.23

The exaggeration of the importance in monetary policy of the power at the disposal
of the state in its legislative capacity can only be attributed to superficial
observation of the processes involved in the transition from commodity money to
credit money. This transition has normally been achieved by means of a state
declaration that inconvertible claims to money were as good means of payment as
money itself. As a rule, it has not been the object of such a declaration to carry out
a change of standard and substit ute credit money for commodity money. In the
great majority of cases, the state has taken such measures merely with certain fiscal
ends in view. It has aimed to increase its own resources by the creation of credit
money. In the pursuit of such a plan as this, the diminution of the money's
purchasing power could hardly seem desirable. And yet it has always been this
depreciation in value which, through the coming into play of Gresham's law, has
caused the change of monetary standard. It would be quite out of harmony with the
facts to assert that cash payments had ever been stopped; that is, that the permanent
convertibility of the notes had been suspended, with the intention of effecting a
transition to a credit standard. This result has always come to pass against the will
of the state, not in accordance with it.

I.4.24

Business usage alone can transform a commodity into a common medium of
exchange. It is not the state, but the common practice of all those who have
dealings in the market, that creates money. It follows that state regulation
attributing general power of debt liquidation to a commodity is unable of itself to
make that commodity into money. If the state creates credit money—and this is
naturally true in a still greater degree of fiat money—it can do so only by taking
things that are already in circulation as money substitutes (that is, as perfectly
secure and immediately convertible claims to money) and isolating them for
purposes of valuation by depriving them of their essential characteristic of
permanent convertibility. Commerce would always protect itself against any other
method of introducing a government credit currency. The attempt to put credit
money into circulation has never been successful, except when the coins or notes in
question have already been in circulation as money substitutes.*40

I.4.25

This is the limit of the constantly overestimated influence of the state on the
monetary system. What the state can do in certain circumstances, by means of its
position as controller of the mint, by means of its power of altering the character of
money substitutes and depriving them of their standing as claims to money that are
payable on demand, and above all by means of those financial resources which
permit it to bear the cost of a change of currency, is to persuade commerce to
abandon one sort of money and adopt another. That is all.

I.4.26

CHAPTER 5
Money as an Economic Good
1 Money Neither a Production Good nor a Consumption Good
It is usual to divide economic goods into the two classes of those which satisfy
human needs directly and those which only satisfy them indirectly: that is,
consumption goods, or goods of the first order; and production goods, or goods of
higher orders.*41 The attempt to include money in either of these groups meets with
insuperable difficulties. It is unnecessary to demonstrate that money is not a
consumption good. It seems equally incorrect to call it a production good.

I.5.1

Of course, if we regard the twofold division of economic goods as exhaustive we
shall have to rest content with putting money in one group or the other. This has
been the position of most economists; and since it has seemed altogether
impossible to call money a consumption good, there has been no alternative but to
call it a production good.

I.5.2

This apparently arbitrary procedure has usually been given only a very cursory
vindication. Roscher, for example, thought it sufficient to mention that money is
"the chief instrument of every transfer" (vornehmstes Werkzeug jeden Verkehrs).*42

I.5.3

In opposition to Roscher, Knies made room for money in the classification of
goods by replacing the twofold division into production goods and consumption
goods by a threefold division into means of production, objects of consumption,
and media of exchange.*43 His arguments on this point, which are unfortunately
scanty, have hardly attracted any serious attention and have been often
misunderstood. Thus Helfferich attempts to confute Knies's proposition, that a sale and-purchase transaction is not in itself an act of production but an act of
(interpersonal) transfer, by asserting that the same sort of objection might be made
to the inclusion of means of transport among instruments of production on the
grounds that transport is not in itself an act of production but an act of (interlocal)
transfer and that the nature of goods is no more altered by transport than by a
change of ownership. *44

I.5.4

Obviously, it is the ambiguity of the German word Verkehr that has obscured the
deeper issues here involved. On the one hand, Verkehr bears a meaning that may be
roughly translated by the word commerce; that is, the exchange of goods and
services on the part of individuals. But it also means the transfer through space of
persons, goods, and information. These two groups of things denoted by the
German word Verkehr have nothing in common but their name. It is therefore
impossible to countenance the suggestion of a relationship between the two
meanings of the word that is involved in the practice of speaking of "Verkehr in the
broader sense," by which is meant the transfer of goods from one person's
possession to that of another, and "Verkehr in the narrower sense," by which is
meant the transfer of goods from one point in space to another.*45 Even popular
usage recognizes two distinct meanings here, not a narrower and a broader version
of the same meaning.

I.5.5

The common nomenclature of the two meanings, as also their incidental confusion,
may well be attributable to the fact that exchange transactions often, but by no
means always, go hand in hand with acts of transport, through space and vice
versa.*46 But obviously this is no reason why science should impute an intrinsic
similarity to these essentially different processes.

I.5.6

It should never have been called in question that the transportation of persons,
goods, and information is to be reckoned part of production, so far as it does not
constitute an act of consumption, as do pleasure trips for example. All the same,
two things have hindered recognition of this fact. The first is the widespread
misconception of the nature of production. There is a naive view of production that
regards it as the bringing into being of matter that did not previously exist, as
creation in the true sense of the word. From this it is easy to derive a contrast
between the creative work of production and the mere transportation of goods. This
way of regarding the matter is entirely inadequate. In fact, the role played by man
in production always consists solely in combining his personal forces with the
forces of Nature in such a way that the cooperation leads to some particular desired
arrangement of material. No human act of production amounts to more than
altering the position of things in space and leaving the rest to Nature.*47 This
disposes of one of the objections to regarding transportation as a productive
process.

I.5.7

The second objection arises from insuffic ient insight into the nature of goods. It is
often overlooked that, among other natural qualities, the position of a thing in space
has important bearings on its capacity for satisfying human wants. Things that are
of perfectly identical technological composition must yet be regarded as specimens
of different kinds of goods if they are not in the same place and in the same state of
readiness for consumption or further production. Till now the position of a good in
space has been recognized only as a factor determining its economic or
noneconomic nature. It is hardly possible to ignore the fact that drinking water in
the desert and drinking water in a well-watered mountain district, despite their
chemical and physical similarity and their equal thirst-quenching properties, have
nevertheless a totally different significance for the satisfaction of human wants.
The only water that can quench the thirst of the traveler in the desert is the water
that is on the spot, ready for consumption.

I.5.8

Within the group of economic goods itself, however, the factor of situation has
been taken into consideration only for goods of certain kinds—those whose
position has been fixed, whether by man or nature; and even among these, attention
has seldom been given to any but the most outstanding example, land. As far as
movable goods are concerned, the factor of situation has been treated as negligible.

I.5.9

This attitude is in consonance with commercial technology. The microscope fails to
reveal any difference between two lots of beet sugar, of which one is warehoused
in Prague and the other in London. But for the purposes of economics it is better to
regard the two lots of sugar as goods of different kinds. Strictly speaking, only
those goods should be called goods of the first order which are already where they
can immediately be consumed. All other economic goods, even if they are ready
for consumption in the technological sense, must be regarded as goods of higher
orders which can be transmuted into goods of the first order only by combination
with the complementary good, "means of transport." Regarded in this light, means
of transport are obviously production goods. "Production," says Wieser, "is the
utilization of the more advantageous among remote conditions of welfare."*48 There
is nothing to prevent us from interpreting the word remote in its literal sense for
once, and not just figuratively.

I.5.10

We have seen that transfer through space is one sort of production; and means of
transport, therefore, so far as they are not consumption goods such as pleasure
yachts and the like, must be included among production goods. Is this true of
money as well? Are the economic services that money renders comparable with
those rendered by means of transport? Not in the least. Production is quite possible
without money. There is no need for money either in the isolated household or in

I.5.11

without money. There is no need for money either in the isolated household or in
the socialized community. Nowhere can we discover a good of the first order of
which we could say that the use of money was a necessary condition of its
production.
It is true that the majority of economists reckon money among production goods.
Nevertheless, arguments from authority are invalid; the proof of a theory is in its
reasoning, not in its sponsorship; and with all due respect for the masters, it must
be said that they have not justified their position very thoroughly in this matter.
This is most remarkable in Böhm-Bawerk. As has been said, Knies recommends
the substitution of a threefold classification of economic goods into objects of
consumption, means of production, and media of exchange, for the customary
twofold division into consumption goods and production goods. In general, BöhmBawerk treats Knies with the greatest respect and, whenever he feels obliged to
differ from him, criticizes his arguments most carefully. But in the present case he
simply disregards them. He unhesitatingly includes money in his concept of social
capital, and incidentally specifies it as a product destined to assist further
production. He refers briefly to the objection that money is an instrument, not of
production, but of exchange; but instead of answering this objection, he embarks
on an extended criticism of those doctrines that treat stocks of good in the hands of
producers and middlemen as goods ready for consumption instead of as
intermediate products.

I.5.12

Böhm-Bawerk's argument proves conclusively that production is not completed
until the goods have been brought to the place where they are wanted, and that it is
illegitimate to speak of goods being ready for consumption until the final process
of transport is completed. But it contributes nothing to our present discussion; for
the chain of reasoning gives way just at the critical link. After having proved that
the horse and wagon with which the farmer brings home his corn and wood must
be reckoned as means of production and as capital, Böhm-Bawerk adds that
"logically all the objects and apparatus of 'bringing home' in the broader economic
sense, the things that have to be transported, the roads, railways, and ships, and the
commercial tool money, must be included in the concept of capital."*49

I.5.13

This is the same jump that Roscher makes. It leaves out of consideration the
difference between transport, which consists in an alteration of the utility of things,
and exchange, which constitutes a separate economic category altogether. It is
illegitimate to compare the part played by money in production with that played by
ships and railways. Money is obviously not a "commercial tool" in the same sense
as account books, exchange lists, the stock exchange, or the credit system.

I.5.14

Böhm-Bawerk's argument in its turn has not remained uncontradicted. Jacoby
objects that while it treats money and the stocks of commodities in the hands of
producers and middlemen as social capital, it nevertheless maintains the view that
social capital is a pure economic category and independent of all legal definitions,
although money and the "commodity" aspect of consumption goods are peculiar to
a "commercial" type of economic organization. *50

I.5.15

The invalidity of this criticism, so far as it is an objection to regarding commodities
as production goods, is implied by what has been said above. There is no doubt that
Böhm-Bawerk is in the right here, and not his critic. It is otherwise with the second
point, the question of the inclusion of money. Admittedly, Jacoby's own discussion
of the capital concept is not beyond criticism, and Böhm-Bawerk's refusal to accept
it is probably justified. *51 But that does not concern us at present. We are only
concerned with the problem of the concept of goods. On this point as well Böhm-

I.5.16

Bawerk disagrees with Jacoby. In the third edition of volume two of his
masterpiece, Capital and Interest, he argues that even a complex socialistic
organization could hardly do without undifferentiated orders or certificates of some
sort, "like money," which refer to the product awaiting distribution. *52 This
particular argument of his was not directly aimed at our present problem.
Nevertheless, it is desirable to inquire whether the opinion expressed in it does not
contain something that may be useful for our purpose as well.
Every sort of economic organization needs not only a mechanism for production
but also a mechanism for distributing what is produced. It will scarcely be
questioned that the distribution of goods among individual consumers constitutes a
part of production, and that in consequence we should include among the means of
production not only the physical instruments of commerce such as stock
exchanges, account books, documents, and the like, but also everything that serves
to maintain the legal system which is the foundation of commerce, as, for example,
fences, railings, walls, locks, safes, the paraphernalia of the law courts, and the
equipment of the organs of government entrusted with the protection of property.
In a socialist state, this category might include among other things Böhm-Bawerk's
"undifferentiated certificates" (to which, however, we cannot allow the description
"like money"; for since money is not a certificate, it will not do to say of a
certificate that it is like money. Money is always an economic good, and to say of a
claim, which is what a certificate is, that it is like money, is only to drop back into
the old practice of regarding rights and business connections as goods. Here we can
invoke Böhm-Bawerk's own authority against himself).*53

I.5.17

What prevents us nevertheless from reckoning money among these "distribution
goods" and so among production goods (and incidentally the same objection
applies to its inclusion among consumption goods) is the following consideration.
The loss of a consumption good or production good results in a loss of human
satisfaction; it makes mankind poorer The gain of such a good results in an
improvement of the human economic position; it makes mankind richer The same
cannot be said of the loss or gain of money. Both changes in the available quantity
of production goods or consumption goods and changes in the available quantity of
money involve changes in values; but whereas the changes in the value of the
production goods and consumption goods do not mitigate the loss or reduce the
gain of satisfaction resulting from the changes in their quantity, the changes in the
value of money are accommodated in such a way to the demand for it that, despite
increases or decreases in its quantity, the economic position of mankind remains
the same. An increase in the quantity of money can no more increase the welfare of
the members of a community, than a diminution of it can decrease their welfare.
Regarded from this point of view, those goods that are employed as money are
indeed what Adam Smith called them, "dead stock, which ... produces nothing."*54

I.5.18

We have shown that, under certain conditions, indirect exchange is a necessary

I.5.19

which the economic order is based.
Production goods derive their value from that of their products. Not so money; for
no increase in the welfare of the members of a society can result from the
availability of an additional quantity of money. The laws which govern the value of
money are different from those which govern the value of production goods and
from those which govern the value of consumption goods. All that these have in
common is their general underlying principle, the fundamental economic law of
value. This is a complete justification of the suggestion put forward by Knies that
economic goods should be divided into means of production, objects of
consumption, and media of exchange; for, after all, the primary object of economic
terminology is to facilitate investigation into the theory of value.

I.5.20

2 Money as Part of Private Capital
We have not undertaken this investigation into the relationship between money and
production goods merely for its terminological interest. What is of importance for
its own sake is not our ultimate conclusion, but the incidental light shed by our
argument upon those peculiarities of money that distinguish it from other economic
goods. These special characteristics of the common medium of exchange will
receive closer attention when we turn to consider the laws that regula te the value of
money and its variations.

I.5.21

But the result of our reasoning, too, the conclusion that money is not a production
good, is not entirely without significance. It will help us to answer the question
whether money is capital or not. This question in its turn is not an end in itself, but
it provides a check upon the answer to a further problem concerning the relations
between the equilibrium rate of interest and the money rate of interest, which will
be dealt with in the third part of this book. If each conclusion confirms the other,
then we may assume with a considerable degree of assurance that our arguments
have not led us into error.

I.5.22

The first grave difficulty in the way of any investigation into the relation between
money and capital arises from the difference of opinion that exists about the
definition of the concept of capital. The views of scholars on the definition of
capital are more divergent than their views on any other point of economics. None

I.5.23

concept of capital or not. The delimitation of concepts of this nature is merely a
question of expediency, in connection with which it is quite easy for differences of
opinion to arise. But the economic function of money is a matter about which it
should be possible to arrive at perfect agreement.
Of the two concepts of capital that Böhm-Bawerk distinguishes, following the
traditional economic terminology, that of what is called private or acquisitive
capital is both the older and the wider. This was the original root idea from which
the narrower concept of social or productive capital was afterward separated. It is
therefore logical to begin our investigation by inquiring into the connection
between private capital and money.

I.5.24

Böhm-Bawerk defines private capital as the aggregate of the products that serve as
a means to the acquisition of goods.*56 It has never been questioned that money
must be included in this category. In fact, the development of the scientific concept
of capital starts from the notion of an interest-bearing sum of money. This concept
of capital has been broadened little by little until at last it has taken the form which
it bears in modern scientific discussion, on the whole in approximate coincidence
with popular usage.

I.5.25

The gradual evolution of the concept of capital has meant at the same time an
increasing understanding of the function of money as capital. Early in history the
lay mind discovered an explanation of the fact that money on loan bears interest—
that money, in fact, "works." But such an explanation as this could not long satisfy
scientific requirements. Science therefore countered it with the fact that money
itself is barren. Even in ancient times general recognition must have been accorded
to the view which later in the shape of the maxim pecunia pecuniam parere non
potest was to be the basis of all discussion of the problem of interest for hundreds
and even thousands of years, and Aristotle undoubtedly did not state it in the
famous passage in his Politics as a new doctrine but as a generally accepted
commonplace.*57 Despite its obviousness, this perception of the physical
unfruitfulness of money was a necessary step on the way to full realization of the
problem of capital and interest. If sums of money on loan do bear "fruit," and it is
not possible to explain this phenomenon by the physical productivity of the money,
then other explanations must be sought.

I.5.26

The next step toward an explanation was provided by the observation that after a
loan is made the borrower as a rule exchanges the money for other economic
goods, and that those owners of money who wish to obtain a profit from their
money without lending it do the same. This was the starting point for the extension
of the concept of capital referred to above, and for the development of the problem
of the money rate of interest into the problem of the "natural" rate of interest.

I.5.27

It is true that centuries passed before these further steps were accomplished. At first
there was a complete halt in the development of the theory of capital. Further
progress was in fact not desired; what was already attained sufficed perfectly; for
the aim of science then was not to explain reality but to vindicate ideals. And
public opinion disapproved of the taking of interest. Even la ter, when the taking of
interest was recognized in Greek and Roman law, it was still not considered
respectable, and all the writers of classical times strove to outdo one another in
condemning it. When the church adopted this proscription of interest, and
attempted to support its attitude by quotations from the Bible, it cut the ground
away from beneath all unauthorized attempts to deal with the matter. Every theorist
who turned his attention to the problem was already convinced that the taking of
interest was harmful, unnatural, and uncharitable, and found his principal task in

I.5.28

the search for new objections to it. It was not for him to explain how interest came
to exist, but to sustain the thesis that it was reprehensible. In such circumstances it
was easy for the doctrine of the sterility of money to be taken over uncritically by
one writer from another as an extraordinarily powerful argument against the
payment of interest, and thus, not for the sake of its content but for the sake of the
conclusion it supported, to become an obstacle in the way of the development of
interest theory. It became a help and no longer a hindrance to this development,
when a move was made toward the construction of a new theory of capital after the
downfall of the old canonist theory of interest. Its first effect, then, was to
necessitate an extension of the concept of capital, and consequently of the problem
of interest. In popular usage and in the terminology of scholars, capital was no
longer "sums of money on loan" but "accumulated stocks of goods."*58
The doctrine of the unfruitfulness of money has another significance for our
problem. It sheds light on the position of money within the class of things
constituting private capital. Why do we include money in capital? Why is interest
paid for sums of money on loan? How is it possible to use sums of money, even
without lending them, so that they yield an income? There can be no doubt about
the answers to these questions. Money is an acquisitive instrument only when it is
exchanged for some other economic good. In this respect money may be compared
with those consumption goods that form part of private capital only because they
are not consumed by their owners themselves but are used for the acquisition of
other goods or services by means of exchange. Money is no more acquisitive
capital than these consumption goods are; the real acquisitive capital consists in the
goods for which the money or the consumption goods are exchanged. Money that
is lying "idle," that is, money that is not exchanged for other goods, is not a part of
capital; it produces no fruit. Money is part of the private capital of an individual
only if and so far as it constitutes a means by which the individual in question can
obtain other capital goods.

I.5.29

3 Money Not a Part of Social Capital
By social or productive capital Böhm-Bawerk means the aggregate of the products
intended for employment in further production. *59 If we accept the views expounded
above, according to which money cannot be included among productive goods,
then neither can it be included in social capital. It is true that Böhm-Bawerk
includes it in social capital, as the majority of the economists that preceded him had
done. This attitude follows logically from regarding money as a productive good;
this is its only justification, and in endeavoring to show that money is not a
productive good we have implied how baseless a justification it is.

I.5.30

In any case, perhaps we may suggest that those writers who include money among
productive goods and consequently among capital goods are not very consistent.
They usually reckon money as a part of social capital in that division of their
systems where they deal with the concepts of money and capital, but certain
obvious further conclusions are not drawn from this. On the contrary, where the
doctrine of the nature of money as capital should logically be applied it appears to
have been suddenly forgotten. In reviewing the determinants of the rate of interest,
writers emphasize over and over again that it is not the greater or smaller quantity
of money that is of importance, but the greater or smaller quantity of other
economic goods. To reconcile this assertion, which is indubitably a correct
summary of the matter, with the other assertion that money is a productive good, is
simply impossible.

I.5.31

CHAPTER 6
The Enemies of Money
1 Money in the Socialist Community
It has been shown that under certain conditions, which occur the more frequently as
division of labor and the differentiation of wants are extended, indirect exchange
becomes inevitable; and that the evolution of indirect exchange gradually leads to
the employment of a few particular commodities, or even one commodity only, as a
common medium of exchange. When there is no exchange of any sort, and hence
no indirect exchange, the use of media of exchange naturally remains unknown.
This was the situation when the isolated household was the typical economic unit,
and this, according to socialist aspirations, is what it will be again one day in that
purely socialistic order where production and distribution are to be systematically
regulated by a central body. This vision of the future socialistic system has not
been described in detail by its prophets; and, in fact, it is not the same vision which
they all see. There are some among them who allow a certain scope for exchange of
economic goods and services, and so far as this is the case the continued use of
money remains possible.

I.6.1

On the other hand, the certificates or orders that the organized society would
distribute to its members cannot be regarded as money. Supposing that a receipt
was given, say, to each laborer for each hour's labor, and that the social income, so
far as it was not employed for the satisfaction of collective needs or the support of
those not able to work, was distributed in proportion to the number of receipts in
the possession of each individual, so that each receipt represented a claim to an
aliquot part of the total amount of goods to be distributed. Then the significance of
any particular receipt as a means of satisfying the wants of an individual, in other
words its value, would vary in proportion to the size of the total dividend. If, with
the same number of hours of labor, the income of the society in a given year was
only half as big as in the previous year, then the value of each receipt would
likewise be halved.

I.6.2

The case of money is different. A decrease of fifty percent in the real social income
would certainly involve a reduction in the purchasing power of money. But this
reduction in the value of money need not bear any direct relation to the decrease in
the size of the income. It might accidentally happen that the purchasing power of
money was exactly halved also; but it need not happen so. This difference is of
fundamental importance.

I.6.3

In fact, the exchange value of money is determined in a totally different way from
that of a certificate or warrant. Titles like these are not susceptible of an
independent process of valuation at all. If it is certain that a warrant or order will
always be honored on demand, then its value will be equal to that of the goods to
which it refers. If this certainty is not absolute, the value of the warrant will be
correspondingly less.

I.6.4

If we suppose that a system of exchange might be developed even in a socialist
society—not merely the exchange of labor certificates but, say, the exchange of
consumption goods between individuals—then we may conceive of a place for the
function of money even within the framework of such a society. This money would
not be so frequently and various ly employed as in an economic order based on
private ownership of the means of production, but its use would be governed by the
same fundamental principles.

I.6.5

These considerations dictate the attitude toward money that must be assumed by
any attempt to construct an imaginary social order, if self-contradiction is to be
avoided. So long as such a scheme completely excludes the free exchange of goods
and services, then it follows logically that it has no need for money; but so far as
any sort of exchange at all is allowed, it seems that indirect exchange achieved by
means of a common medium of exchange must be permitted also.

I.6.6

2 Money Cranks
Superficial critics of the capitalistic economic system are in the habit of directing
their attacks principally against money. They are willing to permit the continuance
of private ownership of the means of production and consequently, given the
present stage of division of labor, of free exchange of goods also; and yet they want
this exchange to be achieved without any medium, or at least without a common
medium, or money. They obviously regard the use of money as harmful and hope
to overcome all social evils by eliminating it. Their doctrine is derived from
notions that have always been extraordinarily popular in lay circles during periods
in which the use of money has been increasing.

I.6.7

All the processes of our economic life appear in a monetary guise; and those who
do not see beneath the surface of things are only aware of monetary phenomena
and remain unconscious of deeper relationships. Money is regarded as the cause of
theft and murder, of deception and betrayal. Money is blamed when the prostitute
sells her body and when the bribed judge perverts the law. It is money against
which the moralist declaims when he wishes to oppose excessive materialism.
Significantly enough avarice is called the love of money; and all evil is attributed
to it.*60

I.6.8

The confused and vague nature of such notions as these is obvious. It is not so clear
whether it is thought that a return to direct exchange by itself will be able to
overcome all the disadvantages of the use of money, or whether it is thought that
other reforms will be necessary as well. The world makers and world improvers
responsible for these notions feel no obligation to follow up their ideas inexorably
to their final consequences. They prefer to call a halt at the point where the
difficulties of the problem are just beginning. And this, incidentally, accounts for
the longevity of their doctrines; so long as they remain nebulous, they offer nothing
for criticism to seize upon.

I.6.9

Even less worthy of serious attention are those schemes of social reform which,
while not condemning the use of money in general, object to the use of gold and
silver In fact, such hostility to the precious metals has something very childish in it.
When Thomas More, for example, endows the criminals in his utopia with golden
chains and the ordinary citizens with gold and silver chamber pots,*61 it is in
something of the spirit that leads primitive mankind to wreak vengeance on lifeless
images and symbols.

I.6.10

It is hardly worthwhile to devote even a moment to such fantastic suggestions,
which have never been taken seriously. All the criticism of them that was necessary
has been completed long ago. *62 But one point, which usually escapes notice, must
be emphasized.

I.6.11

Among the many confused enemies of money there is one group that fights with
other theoretical weapons than those used by its usual associates. These enemies of
money take their arguments from the prevailing theory of banking and propose to
cure all human ills by means of an "elastic credit system, automatically adapted to
the need for currency." It will surprise no one acquainted with the unsatisfactory

I.6.12

the need for currency." It will surprise no one acquainted with the unsatisfactory
state of banking theory to find that scientific criticism has not dealt with such
proposals as it should have done, and that it has in fact been incapable of doing so.
The rejection of schemes such as Ernest Solvay's "social comptabilism"*63 is to be
attributed solely to the practical man's timidity and not to any strict proof of the
weaknesses of the schemes, which has indeed not been forthcoming. All the
banking theorists whose views are derived from the system of Tooke and Fullarton
(and this includes nearly all present-day writers) are helpless with regard to
Solvay's theory and others of the same kind. They would like to condemn them,
since their own feelings as well as the trustworthy judgments of practical men warn
them against the airy speculations of reformers of this type; but they have no
arguments against a system which, in the last analysis, involves nothing but the
consistent application of their own theories.
The third part of this book is devoted exclusively to problems of the banking
system. There the theory of the elasticity of credit is subjected to a detailed
investigation, the results of which perhaps render any further discussion of this
kind of doctrine unnecessary.

PART TWO
THE VALUE OF MONEY

CHAPTER 7
The Concept of the Value of Money
1 Subjective and Objective Factors in the Theory of the Value of Money
The central element in the economic problem of money is the objective exchange
value of money, popularly called its purchasing power. This is the necessary
starting point of all discussion; for it is only in connection with its objective
exchange value that those peculiar properties of money that have differentiated it
from commodities are conspicuous.

II.7.1

This must not be understood to imply that subjective value is of less importance in
the theory of money than elsewhere. The subjective estimates of individuals are the
basis of the economic valuation of money just as of that of other goods. And these
subjective estimates are ultimately derived, in the case of money as in the case of
other economic goods, from the significance attaching to a good or complex of
goods as the recognized necessary condition for the existence of a utility, given
certain ultimate aims on the part of some individual. *1 Nevertheless, while the
utility of other goods depends on certain external facts (the objective use-value of
the commodity) and certain internal facts (the hierarchy of human needs), that is,
on conditions that do not belong to the category of the economic at all but are
partly of a technological and partly of a psychological nature, the subjective value
of money is conditioned by its objective exchange value, that is, by a characteristic
that falls within the scope of economics.

II.7.2

In the case of money, subjective use-value and subjective exchange value
coincide.*2 Both are derived from objective exchange value, for money has no
utility other than that arising from the possibility of obtaining other economic
goods in exchange for it. It is impossible to conceive of any function of money, qua
money, that can be separated from the fact of its objective exchange value. As far
as the use-value of a commodity is concerned, it is immaterial whether the
commodity also has exchange value or not; but for money to have use-value, the
existence of exchange value is essential.

II.7.3

This peculiarity of the value of money can also be expressed by saying that, as far
as the individual is concerned, money has no use-value at all, but only subjective
exchange value. This, for example, is the practice of Rau*3 and Böhm-Bawerk.*4
Whether the one or the other phraseology is employed, scientific investigation of
the characteristic will lead to the same conclusions. There is no reason to enter
upon a discussion of this point, especially since the distinction between value in
use and value in exchange no longer holds the important place in the theory of
value that it used to have.*5 All that we are concerned with is to show that the task
of economics in dealing with the value of money is a bigger one than its task in
dealing with the value of commodities. When explaining the value of commodities,
the economist can and must be content to take subjective use-value for granted and
leave investigation of its origins to the psychologist; but the real problem of the
value of money only begins where it leaves off in the case of commodity values,
viz., at the point of tracing the objective determinants of its subjective value, for

II.7.4

viz., at the point of tracing the objective determinants of its subjective value, for
there is no subjective value of money without objective exchange value. It is not
the task of the economist, but of the natural scientist, to explain why corn is useful
to man and valued by him; but it is the task of the economist alone to explain the
utility of money. Consideration of the subjective value of money without
discussion of its objective exchange value is impossible. In contrast to
commodities, money would never be used unless it had an objective exchange
value or purchasing power. The subjective value of money always depends on the
subjective value of the other economic goods that can be obtained in exchange for
it. Its subje ctive value is in fact a derived concept. If we wish to estimate the
significance that a given sum of money has, in view of the known dependence upon
it of a certain satisfaction, we can do this only on the assumption that the money
possesses a given objective exchange value. "The exchange value of money is the
anticipated use-value of the things that can be obtained with it."*6 Whenever money
is valued by anybody it is because he supposes it to have a certain purchasing
power.
It might possibly be objected that the mere possession by money of an undefined
amount of objective exchange value is not alone sufficient to guarantee the
possibility of using it as a medium of exchange; that it is also necessary that this
purchasing power should be present in a certain degree, neither too great nor too
small, but such that the proportion between the value of the units of money and that
of the units of commodity is a convenient one for carrying through the ordinary
exchange transactions of daily life; that even if it were true that half of the money
in a country could perform the same service as the whole stock if the value of the
monetary unit were doubled, yet it is doubtful if a similar proposition could be
asserted of the case in which its value was increased a millionfold, or diminished to
one-millionth, in inverse correspondence with changes in the quantity of it, since
such a currency would hardly be capable of fulfilling the functions of a common
medium of exchange so well as the currencies in actual use; that we should try to
imagine a commodity money of which a whole ton, or one of which only a
thousandth of a milligram was equivalent to a dollar, and think of the
inconveniences, the insuperable obstacles in fact, which the employment of such a
medium would inevitably place in the way of commerce.

II.7.5

However true this may be, the question of the actual dimensions of the exchange
ratio between money and commodities and of the size of the monetary unit is not
an economic problem. It is a question that belongs to discussion of the technical
conditions that make any particular good suitable for use as money. The relative
scarcity of the precious metals, great enough to give them a high objective
exchange value but not so great as that of the precious stones or radium and
therefore not great enough to make their exchange value too high, must indeed be
reckoned, along with such of their other characteristics as their practically
unlimited divisibility, their malleability, and their powers of resistance to
destructive external influences, as among the factors that were once decisive in
causing them to be recognized as the most marketable goods and consequently to
be employed as money. But nowadays, as monetary systems have developed, the
particular level of value of the precious metals no longer has any important bearing
on their use as money. The modern organization of the clearing system and the
institution of fiduciary media have made commerce independent of the volume and
weight of the monetary material.

II.7.6

2 The Objective Exchange Value of Money

It follows from what has been said that there can be no discussion of the problem
of the value of money without consideration of its objective exchange value. Under
modern conditions, objective exchange value, which Wieser also calls
Verkehrswert (or value in business transactions), is the most important kind of
value, because it governs the social and not merely the individual aspect of
economic life. Except in its explanation of the fundamentals of value theory,
economics deals almost exclusively with objective exchange value.*7 And while this
is true to some extent of all goods, including those which are useful apart from any
exchange value which they possess, it is still truer of money.

II.7.7

"The objective exchange value of goods is their objective significance in exchange,
or, in other words, their capacity in given circumstances to procure a specific
quantity of other goods as an equivalent in exchange."*8 It should be observed that
even objective exchange value is not really a property of the goods themselves,
bestowed on them by nature, for in the last resort it also is derived from the human
process of valuing individual goods. But the exchange ratios that are established
between different goods in commercial transactions, and are determined by the
collective influence of the subjective valuations of all the persons doing business in
the market, present themselves to separate individuals, who usually have an
infinitesimal influence on the determination of the ratios, as accomplished facts,
which in most cases have to be accepted unconditionally. It has thus been easy for
false abstraction from this state of affairs to give rise to the opinion that each good
comes to the market endowed with a definite quantity of value independent of the
valuations of individuals.*9 From this point of view, goods are not exchanged for
one another, by human beings; they simply exchange.

II.7.8

Objective exchange value, as it appears in the subjective theory of value, has
nothing except its name in common with the old idea developed by the Classical
School of a value in exchange inherent in things themselves. In the value theory of
Smith and Ricardo, and in that of their successors, value in exchange plays the
leading part. These theories attempt to explain all the phenomena of value by
starting from value in exchange, which they interpret as labor value or cost-ofproduction value. For modern value theory their terminology can claim only a
historical importance, and a confusion of the two concepts of exchange value need
no longer be feared. This removes the objections that have recently been made to
the continued use of the expression "objective exchange value."*10

II.7.9

If the objective exchange value of a good is its power to command a certain
quantity of other goods in exchange, its price is this actual quantity of other goods.
It follows that the concepts of price and objective exchange value are by no means
identical. "But it is, nevertheless, true that both obey the same laws. For when the
law of price declares that a good actually commands a particular price, and explains
why it does so, it of course implies that the good is able to command this price, and
explains why it is able to do so. The law of price comprehends the law of exchange
value."*11

II.7.10

By "the objective exchange value of money" we are accordingly to understand the
possibility of obtaining a certain quantity of other economic goods in exchange for
a given quantity of money; and by "the price of money" this actual quantity of
other goods. It is possible to express the exchange value of a unit of money in units
of any other commodity and speak of the commodity price of money; but in actual
life this phraseology and the concept it expresses are unknown. For nowadays
money is the sole indicator of prices.

II.7.11

3 The Problems Involved in the Theory of the Value of Money

The theory of money must take account of the fundamental difference between the
principles which govern the value of money and those which govern the value of
commodities. In the theory of the value of commodities it is not necessary at first to
pay any attention to objective exchange value. In this theory, all phenomena of
value and price determination can be explained with subjective use-value as the
starting point. It is otherwise in the theory of the value of money; for since money,
in contrast to other goods, can fulfill its economic function only if it possesses
objective exchange value, an investigation into its subjective value demands an
investigation first into this objective exchange value. In other words, the theory of
the value of money leads us back through subjective exchange value to objective
exchange value.

II.7.12

Under the present economic system, which is founded on the division of labor and
the free exchange of products, producers as a rule do not work directly on their own
behalf but with a view to supplying the market. Consequently their economic
calculations are determined not by the subjective use-values of their products, but
by their subjective exchange values. Valuations which ignore the subjective
exchange value, and consequently the objective exchange value, of a product and
take account only of its subjective use-value, are nowadays most exceptional. They
are on the whole limited to those cases in which the object has a sentimental value.
But if we disregard those things to which certain individuals attach a symbolical
significance because they remind them of experiences or persons that they wish to
remember, while in the eyes of others for which they have not this personal interest
the things possess a very much lower value or even no value at all, it cannot be
denied that human valuations of goods are based upon their exchange value. It is
not use-value, but exchange value, that appears to govern the modern economic
order. Nevertheless, if we trace to its deepest springs, first the subjective and then
the objective exchange value of commodities, we find that in the last resort it is still
the subjective use-value of things that determines the esteem in which they are
held. For, quite apart from the fact that the commodities acquired in exchange for
the products are always valued according to their subjective use-value, the only
valuations that are of final importance in the determination of prices and objective
exchange value are those based on the subjective use-value that the products have
for those persons who are the last to acquire them through the channels of
commerce and who acquire them for their own consumption.

II.7.13

The case of money is different. Its objective exchange value cannot be referred
back to any sort of use-value independent of the existence of this objective
exchange value. In the origins of monetary systems, money is still a commodity
which eventually ceases to circulate on reaching the hands of a final buyer or
consumer.*12 In the early stages of the history of money there were even monetary
commodities whose natural qualities definitely precluded their employment as
money for more than a short time. An ox or a sack of corn cannot remain in
circulation for ever; it has sooner or later to be withdrawn for consumption if that
part of its value which does not depend on its employment as money is not to be
diminished by a deterioration of its substance. In a developed monetary system, on
the other hand, we find commodity money, of which large quantifies remain
constantly in circulation and are never consumed or used in industry; credit money,
whose foundation, the claim to payment, is never made use of; and possibly even
fiat money, which has no use at all except as money.

II.7.14

Many of the most eminent economists have taken it for granted that the value of
money and of the material of which it is made depends solely on its industrial
employment and that the purchasing power of our present-day metallic money, for
instance, and consequently the possibility of its continued employment as money,
would immediately disappear if the properties of the monetary material as a useful

II.7.15

would immediately disappear if the properties of the monetary material as a useful
metal were done away with by some accident or other.*13 Nowadays this opinion is
no longer tenable, not merely because there is a whole series of phenomena which
it leaves unaccounted for, but chiefly because it is in any case opposed to the
fundamental laws of the theory of economic value. To assert that the value of
money is based on the nonmonetary employment of its material is to eliminate the
real problem altogether.*14 Not only have we to explain the possibility of fiat
money, the material of which has a far lower value without the official stamp than
with it; we must also answer the question, whether the possibility of a monetary
employment of the commodity money material affects its utility and consequently
its value, and if so to what extent. The same problem arises in the case of credit
money.
Part of the stock of gold at the command of mankind is used for monetary
purposes, part for industrial. A change from one kind of use to the other is always
possible. Ingots pass from the vaults of the banks to the workshops of the
goldsmiths and gilders, who also directly withdraw current coins from circulation
and melt them down. On the other hand, things made of gold, even with a high
value as works of art, find their way to the mint when unfavorable market
conditions render a sale at anything higher than the bullion price impossible. One
and the same piece of metal can even fulfill both purposes simultaneously, as will
be seen if we think of ornaments that are used as money or of a coin that is worn by
its owner as jewelry until he parts with it again. *15

II.7.16

Investigations into the foundations of the value of money must eliminate those
determinants that arise from the properties of the monetary material as a
commodity, since these present no peculiarity that could distinguish the value of
money from that of other commodities. The value of commodity money is of
importance for monetary theory only insofar as it depends on the peculiar economic
position of the money, on its function as a common medium of exchange. Changes
in the value of the monetary material that arise from its characteristics as a
commodity are consequently to be considered only so far as they seem likely to
make it more or less suitable for performing the function of money. Apart from
this, monetary theory must take the value of the monetary material that arises from
its industrial usefulness as given.

II.7.17

The material of which commodity money is made must have the same value
whether it is used as money or otherwise. Whether a change in the value of gold
originates in its employment as money or in its employment as a commodity, in
either case the value of the whole stock changes uniformly. *16

II.7.18

It is otherwise with credit money and fiat money. With these, the substance that
bears the impression is essentially insignificant in the determination of the value of
the money. In some circumstances it may have a relatively high exchange value
comprising a considerable fraction of the total exchange value of the individual
coin or note. But this value, which is not based on the monetary properties of the
coin or note, only becomes of practical importance at the moment when the value
based on the monetary property vanishes, that is, at the moment when the
individuals participating in commerce cease to use the coin or note in question as a
common medium of exchange. When this is not the case, the coins or notes bearing
the monetary impression must have a higher exchange value than other pieces of
the same material so long as these are not marked out by any special
characteristics.

II.7.19

Again, in the case of credit money the claims used as money have similarly a
different exchange value from other claims of the same kind that are not used as

II.7.20

different exchange value from other claims of the same kind that are not used as
money. The hundred-gulden notes which circulated as money in Austria -Hungary
before the reform of the currency had a higher exchange value than, say, a
government security with a nominal value of a hundred gulden, notwithstanding
the fact that the latter bore interest and the former did not.
Until gold was used as money it was valued merely on account of the possibility of
using it for ornamental purposes. If it had never been used as money, or if it had
ceased to be so used, its present-day value would be determined solely by the
extent to which it was known to be useful in industry. But additional opportunities
of using it provided an addition to the original reasons for esteeming it; gold began
to be valued partly because it could be used as a common medium of exchange. It
is not surprising that its value consequently rose, or that at least a decrease in its
value which possibly would have occurred for other reasons was counterbalanced.
Nowadays the value of gold, our principal modern monetary material, is based on
both possibilities of employment, on that for monetary purposes and on that for
industrial purposes.*17

II.7.21

It is impossible to say how far the present value of money depends on its monetary
employment and how far on its industrial employment. When the institution of
money was first established, the industrial basis of the value of the precious metals
may have preponderated; but with progress in the monetary organization of
economic life the monetary employment has become more and more important. It
is certain that nowadays the value of gold is largely supported by its monetary
employment, and that its demonetization would affect its price in an overwhelming
fashion. *18 The sharp decline in the price of silver since 1873 is recognized as
largely due to the demonetization of this metal in most countries. And when,
between 1914 and 1918, many countries replaced gold by banknotes and Treasury
notes so that gold flowed to those countries that had remained on a gold standard,
the value of gold fell very considerably.

II.7.22

The value of the materials that are used for the manufacture of fat money and credit
money is also influenced by their use as money as well as by all their other uses.
The production of token coins is nowadays one of the most important uses of
silver, for example. Again, when the minting of coins from nickel was begun over
fifty years ago, the price of nickel rose so sharply that the director of the English
mint stated in 1873 that if minting from nickel were continued the cost of the metal
alone would exceed the face value of the coins.*19 If we prefer to regard this sort of
use as industrial and not monetary, however, it is because token coins are not
money but money substitutes, and consequently the peculiar interactions between
changes in the value of money and changes in the value of the monetary material
are absent in these cases.

II.7.23

The task of the theory of the value of money is to expound the laws which regulate
the determination of the objective exchange value of money. It is not its business to
concern itself with the determination of the value of the material from which
commodity money is made so far as this value does not depend on the monetary,
but on the other, employment of this material. Neither is it its task to concern itself
with the determination of the value of those materials that are used for making the
concrete embodiments of fiat money. It discusses the objective exchange value of
money only insofar as this depends on its monetary function.

II.7.24

The other forms of value present no special problems for the theory of the value of
money. There is nothing to be said about the subjective value of money that differs
in any way from what economics teaches of the subjective value of other economic

goods. And all that it is important to know about the objective use-value of money
may be summed up in the one statement—it depends on the objective exchange
value of money.

CHAPTER 8
The Determinants of the Objective Exchange Value, or Purchasing Power, of
Money
(I) The Element of Continuity in the
Objective Exchange Value of Money
1 The Dependence of the Subjective Valuation of Money on the Existence of
Objective Exchange Value
According to modern value theory, price is the resultant of the interaction in the
market of subjective valuations of commodities and price goods. From beginning
to end, it is the product of subjective valuations. Goods are valued by the
individuals exchanging them, according to their subjective use-values, and their
exchange ratios are determined within that range where both supply and demand
are in exact quantitative equilibrium. The law of price stated by Menger and BöhmBawerk provides a complete and numerically precise explanation of these exchange
ratios; it accounts exhaustively for all the phenomena of direct exchange. Under
bilateral competition, market price is determined within a range whose upper limit
is set by the valuations of the lowest bidder among the actual buyers and the
highest offerer among the excluded would-be sellers, and whose lower limit is set
by the valuations of the lowest offerer among the actual sellers and the highest
bidder among the excluded would-be buyers.

II.8.1

This law of price is just as valid for indirect as for direct exchange. The price of
money, like other prices, is determined in the last resort by the subjective
valuations of buyers and sellers. But, as has been said already, the subjective usevalue of money, which coincides with its subje ctive exchange value, is nothing but
the anticipated use-value of the things that are to be bought with it. The subjective
value of money must be measured by the marginal utility of the goods for which
the money can be exchanged.*20

II.8.2

It follows that a valuation of money is possible only on the assumption that the
money has a certain objective exchange value. Such a point d'appui is necessary
before the gap between satisfaction and "useless" money can be bridged. Since
there is no direct connection between money as such and any human want,
individuals can obtain an idea of its utility and consequently of its value only by
assuming a definite purchasing power. But it is easy to see that this supposition
cannot be anything but an expression of the exchange ratio ruling at the time in the
market between the money and commodities.*21

II.8.3

Once an exchange ratio between money and commodities has been established in
the market, it continues to exercise an influence beyond the period during which it
is maintained; it provides the basis for the further valuation of money. Thus the
past objective exchange value of money has a certain significance for its present
and future valuation. The money prices of today are linked with those of yesterday
and before, and with those of tomorrow and after.

II.8.4

But this alone will not suffice to explain the problem of the element of continuity in
the value of money; it only postpones the explanation. To trace back the value that
money has today to that which it had yesterday, the value that it had yesterday to
that which it had the day before, and so on, is to raise the question of what
determined the value of money in the first place. Consideration of the origin of the
use of money and of the particular components of its value that depend on its

II.8.5

use of money and of the particular components of its value that depend on its
monetary function suggests an obvious answer to this question. The first value of
money was clearly the value which the goods used as money possessed (thanks to
their suitability for satisfying human wants in other ways) at the moment when they
were first used as common media of exchange. When individuals began to acquire
objects, not for consumption, but to be used as media of exchange, they valued
them according to the objective exchange value with which the market already
credited them by reason of their "industrial" usefulness, and only as an additional
consideration on account of the possibility of using them as media of exchange.
The earliest value of money links up with the commodity value of the monetary
material. But the value of money since then has been influenced not merely by the
factors dependent on its "industrial" uses, which determine the value of the material
of which the commodity money is made, but also by those which result from its use
as money. Not only its supply and demand for industrial purposes, but also its
supply and demand for use as a medium of exchange, have influenced the value of
gold from that point of time onward when it was first used as money. *22
2 The Necessity for a Value Independent of the Monetary Function Before an
Object Can Serve as Money
If the objective exchange value of money must always be linked with a preexisting
market exchange ratio between money and other economic goods (since otherwise
individuals would not be in a position to estimate the value of the money), it
follows that an object cannot be used as money unless, at the moment when its use
as money begins, it already possesses an objective exchange value based on some
other use. This provides both a refutation of those theories which derive the origin
of money from a general agreement to impute fictitious value to things intrinsically
valueless*23 and a confirmation of Menger's hypothesis concerning the origin of the
use of money.

II.8.6

This link with a preexisting exchange value is necessary not only for commodity
money, but equally for credit money and fiat money. *24 No fiat money could ever
come into existence if it did not satisfy this condition. Let us suppose that, among
those ancient and modern kinds of money about which it may be doubtful whether
they should be reckoned as credit money or fiat money, there have actually been
representatives of pure fiat money. Such money must have come into existence in
one of two ways. It may have come into existence because money substitutes
already in circulation, that is, claims payable in money on demand, were deprived
of their character as claims, and yet still used in commerce as media of exchange.
In this case, the starting point for their valuation lay in the objective exchange
value that they had at the moment when they were deprived of their character as
claims. The other possible case is that in which coins that once circulated as
commodity money are transformed into fiat money by cessation of free coinage
(either because there was no further minting at all or because minting was
continued only on behalf of the Treasury), no obligation of conversion being de
jure or de facto assumed by anybody, and nobody having any grounds for hoping
that such an obligation ever would be assumed by anybody. Here the starting point
for the valuation lies in the objective exchange value of the coins at the time of the
cessation of free coinage.

II.8.7

Before an economic good begins to function as money it must already possess
exchange value based on some other cause than its monetary function. But money
that already functions as such may remain valuable even when the original source
of its exchange value has ceased to exist. Its value then is based entirely on its
function as common medium of exchange.*25

II.8.8

3 The Significance of Preexisting Prices in the Determination of Market
Exchange Ratios
From what has just been said, the important conclusion follows that a historically
continuous component is contained in the objective exchange value of money.

II.8.9

The past value of money is taken over by the present and transformed by it; the
present value of money passes on into the future and is transformed in its turn. In
this there is a contrast between the determination of the exchange value of money
and that of the exchange value of other economic goods. All preexisting exchange
ratios are quite irrelevant so far as the actual levels of the reciprocal exchange
ratios of other economic goods are concerned. It is true that if we look beneath the
concealing monetary veil to the real exchange ratios between goods we observe a
certain continuity. Alterations in real prices occur slowly as a rule. But this stability
of prices has its cause in the stability of the price determinants, not in the law of
price determination itself. Prices change slowly because the subjective valuations
of human beings change slowly. Human needs, and human opinions as to the
suitability of goods for satisfying those needs, are no more liable to frequent and
sudden changes than are the stocks of goods available for consumption, or the
manner of their social distribution. The fact that today's market price is seldom
very different from yesterday's is to be explained by the fact that the circumstances
that determined yesterday's price have not greatly changed overnight, so that
today's price is a resultant of nearly identical factors. If rapid and erratic variations
in prices were usually encountered in the market, the conception of objective
exchange value would not have attained the significance that it is actually accorded
both by consumer and producer.

II.8.10

In this sense, reference to an inertia of prices is unobjectionable, although the errors
of earlier economists should warn us of the real danger that the use of terms
borrowed from mechanics may lead to a "mechanical" system, that is, to one that
abstracts erroneously from the subjective valuations of individuals. But any
suggestion of a causal relationship between past and present prices must be
decisively rejected.

II.8.11

It is not disputed that there are institutional forces in operation which oppose
changes in prices that would be necessitated by changes in valuations, and which
are responsible when changes in prices that would have been caused by changes in
supply and demand are postponed and when small or transitory changes in the
relations between supply and demand lead to no corresponding change in prices at
all. It is quite permissible to speak of an inertia of prices in this sense. Even the
statement that the closing price forms the starting point for the transactions of the
next market*26 may be accepted if it is understood in the sense suggested above. If
the general conditions that determined yesterday's price have altered but little
during the night, today's price should be but little different from that of yesterday,
and in practice it does not seem incorrect to make yesterday's the starting point.
Nevertheless, there is no causal connection between past and present prices as far
as the relative exchange ratios of economic goods (not including money) are
concerned. The fact that the price of beer was high yesterday cannot be of the
smallest significance as far as today's price is concerned—we need only think of
the effect upon the prices of alcoholic drinks that would follow a general triumph
of the Prohibition movement. Anybody who devotes attention to market activities
is daily aware of alterations in the exchange ratios of goods, and it is quite
impossible for anybody who is well acquainted with economic phenomena to
accept a theory which seeks to explain price changes by a supposed constancy of
prices.

II.8.12

It may incidentally be remarked that to trace the determination of prices back to
their supposed inertia, as even Zwiedineck in his pleadings for this assumption is
obliged to admit, is to resign at the outset any hope of explaining the ultimate
causes of prices and to be content with explanations from secondary causes.*27 It
must unreservedly be admitted that an explanation of the earliest forms of exchange
transaction that can be shown to have existed—a task to the solution of which the
economic historian has so far contributed but little would show that the forces that
counteract sudden changes in prices were once stronger than they are now. But it
must positively be denied that there is any sort of connection between those early
prices and those of the present day; that is, if there really is anybody who believes
it possible to maintain the assertion that the exchange ratios of economic goods
(not the money prices) that prevail today on the German stock exchanges are in any
sort of causal connection with those that were valid in the days of Hermann or
Barbarossa. If all the exchange ratios of the past were erased from human memory,
the process of market-price determination might certainly become more difficult,
because everybody would have to construct a new scale of valuations for himself;
but it would not become impossible. In fact, people the whole world over are
engaged daily and hourly in the operation from which all prices result: the decision
as to the relative significance enjoyed by specific quantities of goods as conditions
for the satisfaction of wants.

II.8.13

It is so far as the money prices of goods are determined by monetary factors, that a
historically continuous component is included in them, without which their actual
level could not be explained. This component, too, is derived from exchange ratios
which can be entirely explained by reference to the subjective valuations of the
individuals taking part in the market, even though these valuations were not
originally grounded upon the specifically monetary utility alone of these goods.
The valuation of money by the market can only start from a value possessed by the
money in the past, and this relationship influences the new level of the objective
exchange value of money. The historically transmitted value is transformed by the
market without regard to what has become its historical content.*28 But it is not
merely the starting point for today's objective exchange value of money; it is an
indispensable element in its determination. The individual must take into account
the objective exchange value of money, as determined in the market yesterday,
before he can form an estimate of the quantity of money that he needs today. The
demand for money and the supply of it are thus influenced by the value of money
in the past; but they in their turn modify this value until they are brought into
equilibrium.

II.8.14

4 The Applicability of the Marginal-Utility Theory to Money
Demonstration of the fact that search for the determinants of the objective
exchange value of money always leads us back to a point where the value of money
is not determined in any way by its use as a medium of exchange, but solely by its
other functions, prepares the way for developing a complete theory of the value of
money on the basis of the subjective theory of value and its peculiar doctrine of
marginal utility.

II.8.15

Until now the subjective school has not succeeded in doing this. In fact, among the
few of its members who have paid any attention at all to the problem there have
been some who have actually attempted to demonstrate its insolubility. The
subjective theory of value has been helpless in face of the task here confronting it.

II.8.16

There are two theories of money which, whatever else we may think of them, must
be acknowledged as having attempted to deal with the whole problem of the value
of money.

II.8.17

of money.
The objective theories of value succeeded in introducing a formally
unexceptionable theory of money into their systems, which deduces the value of
money from its cost of production. *29 It is true that the abandonment of this
monetary theory is not merely to be ascribed to those shortcomings of the objective
theory of value in general which led to its supersession by the theory of the modern
school. Apart from this fundamental weakness, the cost-of-production theory of the
value of money exhibited one feature that was an easy target for criticism. While it
certainly provided a theory of commodity money (even if only a formally correct
one), it was unable to deal with the problem of credit money and fiat money.
Nevertheless, it was a complete theory of money insofar as it did at least attempt to
give a full explanation of the value of commodity money.

II.8.18

The other similarly complete theory of the value of money is that version of the
quantity theory associated with the name of Davanzati. *30 According to this theory,
all the things that are able to satisfy human wants are conventionally equated with
all the monetary metal. From this, since what is true of the whole is also true of its
parts, the exchange ratios between commodity units and units of money can be
deduced. Here we are confronted with a hypothesis that is not in any way supported
by facts. To demonstrate its untenability once more would nowadays be a waste of
time. Nevertheless, it must not be overlooked that Davanzati was the first who
attempted to present the problem as a whole and to provide a theory that would
explain not merely the variations in an existing exchange ratio between money and
other economic goods, but also the origin of this ratio.

II.8.19

The same cannot be said of other versions of the quantity theory. These all tacitly
assume a certain value of money as given, and absolutely refuse to investigate
further into the matter. They overlook the fact that what is required is an
explanation of what determines the exchange ratio between money and
commodities, and not merely of what causes changes in this ratio. In this respect,
the quantity theory resembles various general theories of value (many versions of
the doctrine of supply and demand, for example), which have not attempted to
explain price as such but have been content to establish a law of price variations.*31
These forms of the quantity theory are in fact nothing but the application of the law
of supply and demand to the problem of the value of money. They introduce into
monetary theory all the strong points of this doctrine; and of course all its weak
points as well. *32

II.8.20

The revolution in economics since 1870 has not yet been any more successful in
leading to an entirely satisfactory solution of this problem. Of course, this does not

II.8.21

value of money. Kemmerer, it is true, approaches very close to a solution of the
problem but passes it by.
Wieser expressly refers to the incomplete nature of the previous treatment. In his
criticism of the quantity theory he argues that the law of supply and demand in its
older form, the application of which to the problem of money constitutes the
quantity theory, has a very inadequate content, since it gives no explanation at all
of the way in which value is really determined or of its level at any given time, but
confines itself without any further explanation merely to stating the direction in
which value will move in consequence of variations in supply or demand; that is, in
an opposite direction to changes in the former and in the same direction as changes
in the latter. He further argues that it is no longer possible to rest content with a
theory of the economic value of money which deals so inadequately with the
problem; that since the supersession of the old law of supply and demand as
applied to commodities, the case for which it was originally constructed, a more
searching law must also be sought to apply to the case of money. *37 But Wieser does
not deal with the problem whose solution he himself states to be the object of his
investigation, for in the further course of his argument he declares that the concepts
of supply of money and demand for money as a medium of exchange are useless
for his purpose and puts forward a theory which attempts to explain variations in
the objective exchange value of money (objektive innere Tauschwert des Geldes)*38
by reference to the relationship that exists in an economic community between
money income and real income. For while it is true that reference to the ratio
between money income and real income may well serve to explain variations in the
objective exchange value of money, Wieser nowhere makes the attempt to evolve a
complete theory of money—an attempt which, admittedly, the factors of supply and
demand being excluded from consideration, would be certain to fail. The very
objection that he raises against the old quantity theory, that it affirms nothing
concerning the actual determination of value or the level at which it must be
established at any time, must also be raised against his own doctrine; and this is all
the more striking inasmuch as it was Wieser who, by revealing the historical
element in the purchasing power of money, laid the foundation for the further
development of the subjective theory of the value of money.

II.8.22

The unsatisfactory results offered by the subjective theory of value might seem to
justify the opinion that this doctrine and especially its proposition concerning the
significance of marginal utility must necessarily fall short as a means of dealing
with the problem of money. Characteristically enough, it was a representative of
the new school, Wicksell, who first expressed this opinion. Wicksell considers that
the principle which lies at the basis of all modern investigation into the theory of
value, namely, the concept of marginal utilit y, may well be suited to explaining the
determination of exchange ratios between one commodity and another, but that it
has practically no significance at all, or at most an entirely secondary significance,
in explaining the exchange ratios between money and other economic goods.
Wicksell, however, does not appear to detect any sort of objection to the marginalutility theory in this assertion. According to his argument, the objective exchange

II.8.23

Consequently, if there is to be any reaction at all against a price assessment that is
either too high or too low it must in some way or other originate outside the
commodity market. In the further course of his argument, Wicksell arrives at the
conclusion that the regulator of money prices is to be sought in the relations of the
commodity market to the money market, in the broadest sense of the term. The
cause which influences the demand for raw materials, labor, the use of land, and
other means of production, and thus indirectly determines the upward or downward
movement of commodity prices, is the ratio between the money rate of interest
(Darlehnszins) and the "natural" or equilibrium rate of interest (natürliche
Kapitalzins), by which we are to understand that rate of interest which would be
determined by supply and demand if real capital was itself lent directly without the
intermediation of money. *39
Wicksell imagines that this argument of his provides a theory of the determination
of the objective exchange value of money. In fact, however, all that he attempts to
prove is that forces operate from the loan market on the commodity market which
prevent the objective exchange value of money from rising too high or falling too
low. He never asserts that the rate of interest on loans determines the actual level of
this value in any way; in fact, to assert this would be absurd. But if we are to speak
of a level of money prices that is "too high" or "too low," we must first state how
the ideal level with which the actual level is compared has been established. It is in
no way sufficient to show that the position of equilibrium is returned to after any
disturbance, if the existence of this position of equilibrium is not first explained.
Indubitably, this is the primary problem, and its solution leads directly to that of the
other; without it, further inquiry must remain unfruitful, for the state of equilibrium
can only be maintained by those forces which first established it and continue to
reestablish it. If the circumstances of the loan market can provide no explanation of
the genesis of the exchange ratio subsisting between money and other economic
goods, then neither can they help to explain why this ratio does not alter. The
objective exchange value of money is determined in the market where money is
exchanged for commodities and commodities for money. To explain its
determination is the task of the theory of the value of money. But Wicksell is of the
opinion that "the laws of the exchange of commodities contain in themselves
nothing that could determine the absolute level of money prices."*40 This amounts to
a denial of all possibility of scientific investigation in this sphere.

II.8.24

Helfferich also is of the opinion that there is an insurmountable obstacle in the way
of applying the marginal-utility theory to the problem of money; for while the
marginal-utility theory attempts to base the exchange value of goods on the degree
of their utility to the individual, the degree of utility of money to the individual
quite obviously depends on its exchange value, since money can have utility only if
it has exchange value, and the degree of the utility is determined by the level of the
exchange value. Money is valued subjectively according to the amount of
consumable goods that can be obtained in exchange for it, or according to what
other goods have to be given in order to obtain the money needed for making
payments. The marginal utility of money to any individual, that is, the marginal
utility derivable from the goods that can be obtained with the given quantity of
money or that must be surrendered for the required money, presupposes a certain
exchange value of the money; so the latter cannot be derived from the former.*41

II.8.25

Those who have realized the significance of historically transmitted values in the
determination of the objective exchange value of money will not find great
difficulty in escaping from this apparently circular argument. It is true that
valuation of the monetary unit by the individual is possible only on the assumption
that an exchange ratio already exists in the market between the money and other
economic goods. Nevertheless, it is erroneous to deduce from this that a complete

II.8.26

economic goods. Nevertheless, it is erroneous to deduce from this that a complete
and satisfactory explanation of the determination of the objective exchange value
of money cannot be provided by the marginal-utility theory. The fact that this
theory is unable to explain the objective exchange value of money entirely by
reference to its monetary utility; that to complete its explanation, as we were able
to show, it is obliged to go back to that original exchange value which was based
not on a monetary function at all but on other uses of the object that was to be used
as money—this must not in any way be reckoned to the discredit of the theory, for
it corresponds exactly to the nature and origin of the particular objective exchange
value under discussion. To demand of a theory of the value of money that it should
explain the exchange ratio between money and commodities solely with reference
to the monetary function, and without the assistance of the element of historical
continuity in the value of money, is to make demands of it that run quite contrary to
its nature and its proper task.
The theory of the value of money as such can trace back the objective exchange
value of money only to that point where it ceases to be the value of money and
becomes merely the value of a commodity. At this point the theory must hand over
all further investigation to the general theory of value, which will then find no
further difficulty in the solution of the problem. It is true that the subjective
valuation of money presupposes an existing objective exchange value; but the
value that has to be presupposed is not the same as the value that has to be
explained; what has to be presupposed is yesterday's exchange value, and it is quite
legitimate to use it in an explanation of that of today. The objective exchange value
of money which rules in the market today is derived from day's under the influence
of the subjective valuations of the individuals frequenting the market, just as
yesterday's in its turn was derived under the influence of subjective valuations from
the objective exchange value possessed by the money the day before yesterday.

II.8.27

If in this way we continually go farther and farther back we must eventually arrive
at a point where we no longer find any component in the objective exchange value
of money that arises from valuations based on the function of money as a common
medium of exchange; where the value of money is nothing other than the value of
an object that is useful in some other way than as money. But this point is not
merely an instrumental concept of theory; it is an actual phenomenon of economic
history, making its appearance at the moment when indirect exchange begins.

II.8.28

Before it was usual to acquire goods in the market, not for personal consumption,
but simply in order to exchange them again for the goods that were really wanted,
each individual commodity was only accredited with that value given by the
subjective valuations based on its direct utility. It was not until it became
customary to acquire certain goods merely in order to use them as media of
exchange that people began to esteem them more highly than before, on account of
this possibility of using them in indirect exchange. The individual valued them in
the first place because they were useful in the ordinary sense, and then additionally
because they could be used as media of exchange. Both sorts of valuation are
subject to the law of marginal utility. Just as the original starting point of the value
of money was nothing but the result of subjective valuations, so also is the presentday value of money.

II.8.29

But Helfferich manages to bring forward yet another argument for the
inapplicability of the marginal-utility theory to money. Looking at the economic
system as a whole, it is clear that the notion of marginal utility rests on the fact that,
given a certain quantity of goods, only certain wants can be satisfied and only a
certain set of utilities provided. With given wants and a given set of means, the
marginal degree of utility is determined also. According to the marginal-utility

II.8.30

marginal degree of utility is determined also. According to the marginal-utility
theory, this fixes the value of the goods in relation to the other goods that are
offered as an equivalent in exchange, and fixes it in such a manner that that part of
the demand that cannot be satisfied with the given supply is excluded by the fact
that it is not able to offer an equivalent corresponding to the marginal utility of the
good demanded. Now Helfferich objects that while the existence of a limited
supply of any goods except money is in itself sufficient to imply the limitation of
their utility also, this is not true of money. The utility of a given quantity of money
depends directly upon the exchange value of the money, not only from the point of
view of the individual, but also for society as a whole. The higher the value of the
unit in relation to other goods, the greater will be the quantity of these other goods
that can be paid for by means of the same sum of money. The value of goods in
general results from the limitation of the possible utilities that can be obtained from
a given supply of them, and while it is usually higher according to the degree of
utility which is excluded by the limitation of supply, the total utility of the supply
itself cannot be increased by an increase in its value; but in the case of money, the
utility of a given supply can be increased at will by an increase in the value of the
unit.*42
The error in this argument is to be found in its regarding the utility of money from
the point of view of the community instead of from that of the individual. Every
valuation must emanate from somebody who is in a position to dispose in exchange
of the object valued. Only those who have a choice between two economic goods
are able to form a judgment as to value, and they do this by preferring the one to
the other. If we start with valuations from the point of view of society as a whole,
we tacitly assume the existence of a socialized economic organization in which
there is no exchange and in which the only valuations are those of the responsible
official body. Opportunities for valuation in such a society would arise in the
control of production and consumption, as, for example, in deciding how certain
production goods were to be used when there were alternative ways of using them.
But in such a society there would be no room at all for money. Under such
conditions, a common medium of exchange would have no utility and consequently
no value either. It is therefore illegitimate to adopt the point of view of the
community as a whole when dealing with the value of money. All consideration of
the value of money must obviously presuppose a state of society in which exchange
takes place and must take as its starting point individuals acting as independent
economic agents within such a society,*43 that is to say, individuals engaged in
valuing things.

II.8.31

5 "Monetary" and "Nonmonetary" Influences Affecting the Objective Exchange
Value of Money
Now, the first part of the problem of the value of money having been solved, it is at
last possible for us to evolve a plan of further procedure. We no longer are
concerned to explain the origin of the objective exchange value of money; this task
has already been performed in the course of the preceding investigation. We now
have to establish the laws which govern variations in existing exchange ratios
between money and the other economic goods. This part of the problem of the
value of money has occupied economists from the earliest times, although it is the
other that ought logically to have been dealt with first. For this reason, as well as
for many others, what has been done toward its elucidation does not amount to very
much. Of course, this part of the problem is also much more complicated than the
first part.

II.8.32

In investigations into the nature of changes in the value of money it is usual to
distinguish between two sorts of determinants of the exchange ratio that connects

II.8.33

distinguish between two sorts of determinants of the exchange ratio that connects
money and other economic goods; those that exercise their effect on the money
side of the ratio and those that exercise their effect on the commodity side. This
distinction is extremely useful; without it, in fact, all attempts at a solution would
have to be dismissed beforehand as hopeless. Nevertheless its true meaning must
not be forgotten.
The exchange ratios between commodities—and the same is naturally true of the
exchange ratios between commodities and money—result from determinants which
affect both terms of the exchange ratio. But existing exchange ratios between goods
may be modified by a change in determinants connected only with one of the two
sets of exchanged objects. Although all the factors that determine the valuation of a
good remain the same, its exchange ratio with another good may alter if the factors
that determine the val uation of this second good alter. If of two persons I prefer A
to B, this preference may be reversed, even though my feeling for A remains
unchanged, if I contract a closer friendship with B. Similarly with the relationships
between goods and human beings. He who today prefers the consumption of a cup
of tea to that of a dose of quinine may make a contrary valuation tomorrow, even
though his liking for tea has not diminished, if he has, say, caught a fever
overnight. Whereas the factors that determine prices always affect both sets of the
goods that are to be exchanged, those of them which merely modify existing prices
may sometimes be restricted to one set of goods only. *44

II.8.34

(II) Fluctuations in the Objective Exchange Value of Money
Evoked by Changes in the Ratio Between the
Supply of Money and the Demand for It
6 The Quantity Theory
That the objective exchange value of money as historically transmitted (der
geschichtlich überkommene objektive Tauschwert des Geldes) is affected not only
by the industrial use of the material from which it is made, but also by its monetary
use, is a proposition which hardly any economist would nowadays deny. It is true
that lay opinion was molded entirely by the contrary belief until very recent times.
To a naive observer, money made out of precious metal was "sound money"
because the piece of precious metal was an "intrinsically" valuable object, while
paper money was "bad money" because its value was only "artificial." But even the
layman who holds this opinion accepts the money in the course of business
transactions, not for the sake of its industrial use-value, but for the sake of its
objective exchange value, which depends largely upon its monetary employment.
He values a gold coin not merely for the sake of its industrial use-value, say
because of the possibility of using it as jewelry, but chiefly on account of its
monetary utility. But, of course, to do something, and to render an account to
oneself of what one does and why one does it, are quite different things.*45

II.8.35

Judgment upon the shortcomings of popular views about money and its value must
be lenient, for even the attitude of science toward this problem has not always been
free from error. Happily, the last few years have seen a gradual but definite change
in popular monetary theory. It is now generally recognized that the value of money
depends partly on its monetary function. This is due to the increased attention that
has been devoted to questions of monetary policy since the commencement of the
great controversy about the standards. The old theories proved unsatisfactory; it

II.8.36

which attacked this opinion and their complete freedom from the restraining
influence of any sort of knowledge of the theory of value may occasionally lead the
economist to regard them as unimportant; but they may at least claim to have
performed the service of shaking deep-rooted prejudices and stimulating a general
interest in the problem of prices. No doubt they are a gratifying indication of a
growing interest in economic questions; if this is kept in mind, it is possible to
think more generously of many erroneous monetary theories.
It is true that there has been no lack of attempts to explain the peculiar phenomena
of modern monetary systems in other ways. But they have all been unsuccessful.
Thus, in particular, Laughlin's theory comes to grief in failing to take account of
the special aspects of the value of money that are associated with the specifically
monetary function. Quite correctly, Laughlin stresses as the peculiar characteristic
of money substitutes their constant and immediate convertibility into money. *46
Nevertheless, he would seem to be mistaken on a fundamental point when he
applies the name of token money to such currencies as the rupee from 1893 to 1899
and the Russian ruble and Austrian gulden at the time of the suspension of cash
payments. He accounts for the fact that a piece of paper which is not immediately
convertible into gold can have any value at all, by reference to the possibility that it
will nevertheless someday be converted. He compares inconvertible paper money
with the shares of a concern which is temporarily not paying any dividend but
whose shares may nevertheless have a certain exchange value because of the
possibility of future dividends. And he says that the fluctuations in the exchange
value of such paper money are consequently based upon the varying prospects of
its ultimate conversion. *47

II.8.37

The error in this conclusion may be most simply demonstrated by means of an
actual example. Let us select for this purpose the monetary history of Austria,
which Laughlin also uses as an illustration. From 1859 onward the Austrian
National Bank was released from the obligation to convert its notes on demand into
silver, and nobody could tell when the state paper money issued in 1866 would be
redeemed, or even if it would be redeemed at all. It was not until the later 1890s
that the transition to metallic money was completed by the actual resumption of
cash payments on the part of the Austro-Hungarian Bank.

II.8.38

Now Laughlin attempts to explain the value of the Austrian currency during this
period by reference to the prospect of a future conversion of the notes into metallic
commodity money. He finds the basis of its value, at first in an expectation that it
would be converted into silver, and afterward in an expectation that it would be
converted into gold, and traces the vicissitudes of its purchasing power to the
varying chances of its ultimate conversion. *48

II.8.39

The inadmissibility of this argument can be demonstrated in a striking fashion. In
the year 1884—the year is chosen at random—the five percent Austrian
government bonds were quoted on the Viennese Stock Exchange at an average rate
of 95.81, or 4.19 percent below par. The quotation was in terms of Austrian paper
gulden. The government bonds represented claims against the Austrian state
bearing interest at five percent. Thus both the bonds and the notes were claims

II.8.40

converted into gold. The question now arises: How could it come about that the
government bonds, bearing interest at five percent, could be valued less highly than
the non-interest-bearing currency notes? This could not possibly be attributed, say,
to the fact that people hoped that the currency notes would be converted into gold
before the bonds were redeemed. There was no suggestion of such an expectation.
Quite another circumstance decided the matter.
The currency notes were common media of exchange—they were money—and
consequently, besides the value that they possessed as claims against the state, they
also had a value as money. It is beyond doubt that their value as claims alone
would not have been an adequate basis even for a relatively large proportion of
their actual exchange value. The date of repayment of the claims that were
embodied in these notes was in fact quite uncertain, but in any case very distant. As
claims, it was impossible for them to have a higher exchange value than
corresponded to the then value of the expectation of their repayment. Now, after
the cessation of free coinage of silver it was fairly obvious that the paper gulden
(and incidentally the silver gulden) would not be converted at a rate appreciably in
excess of the average rate at which it circulated in the period immediately
preceding the conversion. In any case, after the legal determination of the
conversion ratio by the Currency Regulation Law of August 2, 1892, it was settled
that the conversion of the currency notes would not take place at any higher rate
than this. How could it come about, then, that the gold value of the krone (the halfgulden) already fluctuated about this rate as early as the second half of the year
1892 although the date of conversion was then still quite unknown? Usually a
claim to a fixed sum, the date of payment of which lies in the uncertain future, is
valued considerably less highly than the sum to which it refers. To this question
Laughlin's theory cannot offer an answer; only by taking account of the fact that
the monetary function also contributes toward value is it possible to find a
satisfactory explanation.

II.8.41

The attempts that have so far been made, to determine the quantitative significance
of the forces emanating from the side of money that affect the exchange ratio
existing between money and other economic goods, have followed throughout the
line of thought of the quantity theory. This is not to say that all the exponents of the
quantity theory had realized that the value of money is not determined solely by its
nonmonetary, industrial employment, but also or even solely by its monetary
function. Many quantity theorists have been of another opinion on this point and
have believed that the value of money depends solely on the industrial employment
of the monetary material. The majority have had no clear conception of the
question at all; very few have approached its true solution. It is often hard to decide
in which class certain of these authors should be placed; their phraseology is often
obscure and their theories not seldom contradictory. All the same, let us suppose
that all quantity theorists had recognized the significance of the monetary function
in the determination of the value of the monetary material, and criticize the
usefulness of their theory from this point of view.

II.8.42

When the determinants of the exchange ratios between economic goods were first
inquired into, attention was early devoted to two factors whose importance for the
pricing process was not to be denied. It was impossible to overlook the well-known
connection between variations in the available quantity of goods and variations in
prices, and the proposition was soon formulated that a good would rise in price if
the available quantity of it diminished. Similarly, the importance of the total

II.8.43

science. Of all explanations of prices it is the oldest. We cannot dismiss it offhand
as erroneous; the only valid objection to it is that it does not go back to the ultimate
determinants of prices. It is correct or incorrect, according to the content given to
the words demand and supply. It is correct, if account is taken of all the factors that
motivate people in buying and selling. It is incorrect, if supply and demand are
interpreted and compared in a merely quantitative sense.*49
It was an obvious step to take this theory, that had been constructed to explain the
reciprocal exchange ratios of commodities, and apply it to fluctuations in the
relative values of commodities and money also. As soon as people became
conscious of the fact of variations in the value of money at all, and gave up the
naive conception of money as an invariable measure of value, they began to explain
these variations also by quantitative changes in supply and demand.

II.8.44

It is true that the usual criticism of the quantity theory (often expressed with more
resentment than is consonant with that objectivity which alone should be the
distinctive mark of scientific investigation) had an easy task so far as it was leveled
against the older, incomplete, version. It was not difficult to prove that the
supposition that changes in the value of money must be proportionate to changes in
the quantity of money, so that for example a doubling of the quantity of money
would lead to a doubling of prices also, was not in accordance with facts and could
not be theoretically established in any way whatever.*50 It was still simpler to show
the untenability of the naive version of the theory which regarded the total quantity
of money and the total stock of money as equivalent.

II.8.45

But all these objections do not touch the essence of the doctrine. Neither can any
sort of refutation or limitation of the quantity theory be deduced from the fact that a
number of writers claim validity for it only on the assumption ceteris paribus; not
even though they state further that this supposition never is fulfilled and never
could be fulfilled. *51 The assumption ceteris paribus is the self-evident appendage
of every scientific doctrine and there is no economic law that can dispense with it.

II.8.46

Against such superficial criticism the quantity theory has been well able to defend
itself triumphantly, and through the centuries, condemned by some and exalted as
an indisputable truth by others, it has always been in the very center of scientific
discussion. It has been dealt with in an immense literature, far beyond the power of
any one person to master. It is true that the scientific harvest of these writings is but
small. The theory has been adjudged "right" or "wrong," and statistical data (mostly
incomplete and incorrectly interpreted) have been used both to "prove" and to
"disprove" it—although sufficient care has seldom been taken to eliminate
variations brought about by accidental circumstances. On the other hand,
investigation on a basis of the theory of value has but seldom been attempted.

II.8.47

If we wish to arrive at a just appraisal of the quantity theory we must consider it in
the light of the contemporary theories of value. The core of the doctrine consists in
the proposition that the supply of money and the demand for it both affect its value.
This proposition is probably a sufficiently good hypothesis to explain big changes
in prices; but it is far from containing a complete theory of the value of money. It
describes one cause of changes in prices; it is nevertheless inadequate for dealing
with the problem exhaustively. By itself it does not comprise a theory of the value
of money; it needs the basis of a general value theory. One after another, the
doctrine of supply and demand, the cost-of-production theory, and the subjective
theory of value have had to provide the foundations for the quantity theory.

II.8.48

If we make use in our discussion of only one fundamental idea contained in the
quantity theory, the idea that a connection exists between variations in the value of

II.8.49

quantity theory, the idea that a connection exists between variations in the value of
money on the one hand and variations in the relations between the demand for
money and the supply of it on the other hand, our reason is not that this is the most
correct expression of the content of the theory from the historical point of view, but
that it constitutes that core of truth in the theory which even the modern
investigator can and must recognize as useful. Although the historian of economic
theory may find this formulation inexact and produce quotations to refute it, he
must nevertheless admit that it contains the correct expression of what is valuable
in the quantity theory and usable as a cornerstone for a theory of the value of
money.
Beyond this proposition, the quantity theory can provide us with nothing. Above
all, it fails to explain the mechanism of variations in the value of money. Some of
its expositors do not touch upon this question at all; the others employ an
inadequate principle for dealing with it. Observation teaches us that certain
relations of the kind suggested between the available stock of money and the need
for money do in fact exist; the problem is to deduce these relations from the
fundamental laws of value and so at last to comprehend their true significance.

II.8.50

7 The Stock of Money and the Demand for Money
The process, by which supply and demand are accommodated to each other until a
position of equilibrium is established and both are brought into quantitative and
qualitative coincidence, is the higgling of the market. But supply and demand are
only the links in a chain of phenomena, one end of which has this visible
manifestation in the market, while the other is anchored deep in the human mind.
The intensity with which supply and demand are expressed, and consequently the
level of the exchange ratio at which both coincide, depends on the subjective
valuations of individuals. This is true, not only of the direct exchange ratios
between economic goods other than money, but also of the exchange ratio between
money on the one hand and commodities on the other.

II.8.51

For a long time it was believed that the demand for money was a quantity
determined by objective factors and independently of subjective considerations. It
was thought that the demand for money in an economic community was
determined, on the one hand by the total quantity of commodities that had to be
paid for during a given period, and on the other hand by the velocity of circulation
of the money. There is an error in the very starting point of this way of regarding
the matter, which was first successfully attacked by Menger.*52 It is inadmissible to
begin with the demand for money of the community. The individualistic economic
community as such, which is the only sort of community in which there is a
demand for money, is not an economic agent. It demands money only insofar as its
individual members demand money. The demand for money of the economic
community is nothing but the sum of the demands for money of the individual
economic agents composing it. But for individual economic agents it is impossible
to make use of the formula: total volume of transactions ÷ velocity of circulation. If
we wish to arrive at a description of the demand for money of an individual we
must start with the considerations that influence such an individual in receiving and
paying out money.

II.8.52

Every economic agent is obliged to hold a stock of the common medium of
exchange sufficient to cover his probable business and personal requirements. The
amount that will be required depends upon individual circumstances. It is
influenced both by the custom and habits of the individual and by the organization
of the whole social apparatus of production and exchange.

II.8.53

But all of these objective factors always affect the matter only as motivations of the
individual. They are never capable of a direct influence upon the actual amount of
his demand for money. Here, as in all departments of economic life, it is the
subjective valuations of the separate economic agents that alone are derisive. The
store of purchasing power held by two such agents whose objective economic
circumstances were identical might be quite different if the advantages and
disadvantages of such a store were estimated differently by the different agents.

II.8.54

The cash balance held by an individual need by no means consist entirely of
money. If secure claims to money, payable on demand, are employed commercially
as substitutes for money, being tendered and accepted in place of money, then
individuals' stores of money can be entirely or partly replaced by a corresponding
store of these substitutes. In fact, for technical reasons (such, for example, as the
need for having money of various denominations on hand) this may sometimes
prove an unavoidable necessity. It follows that we can speak of a demand for
money in a broader and in a narrower sense. The former comprises the entire
demand of an individual for money and money substitutes; the second, merely his
demand for money proper. The former is determined by the will of the economic
agent in question. The latter is fairly independent of individual influences, if we
disregard the question of denomination referred to above. Apart from this, the
question whether a greater or smaller part of the cash balance held by an individual
shall consist of money substitutes is only of importance to him when he has the
opportunity of acquiring money substitutes which bear interest, such as interestbearing banknotes—a rare case—or bank deposits. In all other cases it is a matter
of complete indifference to him.

II.8.55

The individual's demand and stock of money are the basis of the demand and stock
in the whole community. So long as there are no money substitutes in use, the
social demand for money and the social stock of money are merely the respective
sums of the individual demands and stocks. But this is changed with the advent of
money substitutes. The social demand for money in the narrower sense is no longer
the sum of the individual demands for money in the narrower sense, and the social
demand for money in the broader sense is by no means the sum of the individual
demands for money in the broader sense. Part of the money substitutes functioning
as money in the cash holdings of individuals are "covered" by sums of money held
as "redemption funds" at the place where the money substitutes are cashable, which
is usually, although not necessarily, the issuing concern. We shall use the term
money certificates for those money substitutes that are completely covered by the
reservation of corresponding sums of money, and the term fiduciary media *53 for
those which are not covered in this way. The suitability of this terminology, which
has been chosen with regard to the problem to be dealt with in the third part of the
present work, must be demonstrated in that place. It is not to be understood in the
light of banking technique or in a juristic sense; it is merely intended to serve the
ends of economic argument.

II.8.56

Only in the rarest cases can any particular money substitutes be immediately
assigned to the one or the other group. That is possible only for those money
substitutes of which the whole species is either entirely covered by money or not
covered by money at all. In the case of all other money substitutes, those the total
quantity of which is partly covered by money and partly not covered by money,
only an imaginary ascription of an aliquot part to each of the two groups can take
place. This involves no fresh difficulty. If, for example, there are banknotes in
circulation one-third of the quantity of which is covered by money and two-thirds
not covered, then each individual note is to be reckoned as two-thirds fiduciary
medium and one-third money certificate. It is thus obvious that a community's
demand for money in the broader sense cannot be the sum of the demands of

II.8.57

demand for money in the broader sense cannot be the sum of the demands of
individuals for money and money substitutes, because to reckon in the demand for
money certificates as well as that for the money that serves as a cover for them as
the banks and elsewhere is to count the same amount twice over. A community's
demand for money in the broader sense is the sum of the demands of the individual
economic agents for money proper and fiduciary media (including the demand for
cover). And a community's demands for money in the narrower sense are the sum
of the demands of the individual economic agents for money and money
certificates (this time not including cover).
In this part we shall ignore the existence of fiduciary media and assume that the
demands for money of individual economic agents can be satisfied merely by
money and money certificates, and consequently that the demand for money of the
whole economic community can be satisfied merely by money proper.*54 The third
part of this book is devoted to an examination of the important and difficult
problems arising from the creation and circulation of fiduciary media.

II.8.58

The demand for money and its relations to the stock of money form the starting
point for an explanation of fluctuations in the objective exchange value of money.
Not to understand the nature of the demand for money is to fail at the very outset of
any attempt to grapple with the problem of variations in the value of money. If we
start with a formula that attempts to explain the demand for money from the point
of view of the community instead of from that of the individual, we shall fail to
discover the connection between the stock of money and the subjective valuations
of individuals—the foundation of all economic activity. But on the other hand, this
problem is solved without difficulty if we approach the phenomena from the
individual agent's point of view.

II.8.59

No longer explanation is necessary, of the way in which an individual will behave
in the market when his demand for money exceeds his stock of it. He who has more
money on hand than he thinks he needs, will buy, in order to dispose of the
superfluous stock of money that lies useless on his hands. If he is an entrepreneur,
he will possibly enlarge his business. If this use of the money is not open to him, he
may purchase interest-bearing securities; or possibly he may decide to purchase
consumption goods. But in any case, he expresses by a suitable behavior in the
market the fact that he regards his reserve of purchasing power as too large.

II.8.60

And he whose demand for money is less than his stock of it will behave in an

II.8.61

money, for the commodity that he actually requires for consumption.
The older theories, which started from an erroneous conception of the social
demand for money, could never arrive at a solution of this problem. Their sole
contribution is limited to paraphrases of the proposition that an increase in the
stock of money at the disposal of the community while the demand for it remains
the same decreases the objective exchange value of money, and that an increase of
the demand with a constant available stock has the contrary effect, and so on. By a
flash of genius, the formulators of the quantity theory had already recognized this.
We cannot by any means call it an advance when the formula giving the amount of
the demand for money (volume of transactions ÷ velocity of circulation) was
reduced to its elements, or when the attempt was made to give exact precision to
the idea of a stock of money, so long as this occurred under a misapprehension of
the nature of fiduciary media and of clearing transactions. No approach whatever
was made toward the central problem of this part of the theory of money so long as
theorists were unable to show the way in which subjective valuations are affected
by variations in the ratio between the stock of money and the demand for money.
But this task was necessarily beyond the power of these theories; they break down
at the crucial point.*55

II.8.62

Recently, Wieser has expressed himself against employing the "collective concept
of the demand for money" as the starting point for a theory of fluctuations in the
objective exchange value of money. He says that in an investigation of the value of
money we are not concerned with the total demand for money. The demand for
money to pay taxes with, for example, does not come into consideration, for these
payments do not affect the value of money but only transfer purchasing power from
those who pay the taxes to those who receive them. In the same way, capital and
interest payments in loan transactions and the making of gifts and bequests merely
involve a transference of purchasing power between persons and not an
augmentation or dimin ution of it. A functional theory of the value of money must,
in stating its problem, have regard only to those factors by which the value of
money is determined. The value of money is determined in the process of
exchange. Consequently the theory of the value of money must take account only
of those quantifies which enter into the process of exchange.*56

II.8.63

But these objections of Wieser's are not only rebutted by the fact that even the
surrender of money in paying taxes, in making capital and interest payments, and in
giving presents and bequests, falls into the economic category of exchange. Even if
we accept Wieser's narrow definition of exchange, we must still oppose his
argument. It is not a peculiarity of money that its value (Wieser obviously means
its objective exchange value) is determined in the process of exchange; the same is
true of all other economic goods. For all economic goods it must therefore be
correct to say that the theory of value has to investigate only certain quantities,
namely, only those that are involved in the process of exchange. But there is no
such thing in economics as a quantity that is not involved in the process of
exchange. From the economic point of view, a quantity has no other relationships
than those which exercise some influence upon the valuations of individuals
concerned in some process or other of exchange.

II.8.64

This is true, even if we admit that value only arises in connection with exchange in
the narrow sense intended by Wieser. But those who participate in exchange
transactions, and consequently desire to acquire or dispose of money do not value
the monetary unit solely with regard to the fact that they can use it in other acts of

II.8.65

and to make presents. They consider the level of their purchasing-power reserves
with a view to the necessity of having money ready for all these purposes, and their
judgment as to the extent of their requirements for money is what decides the
demand for money with which they enter the market.
8 The Consequences of an Increase in the Quantity of Money While the Demand
for Money Remains Unchanged or Does Not Increase to the Same Extent
Those variations in the ratio between the individual's demand for money and his
stock of it that arise from purely individual causes cannot as a rule have a very
large quantitative influence in the market. In most cases they will be entirely, or at
least partly, compensated by contrary variations emanating from other individuals
in the market. But a variation in the objective exchange value of money can arise
only when a force is exerted in one direction that is not canceled by a counteracting
force in the opposite direction. If the causes that alter the ratio between the stock of
money and the demand for it from the point of view of an individual consist merely
in accidental and personal factors that concern that particular individual only, then,
according to the law of large numbers, it is likely that the forces arising from this
cause, and acting in both directions in the market, will counterbalance each other.
The probability that the compensation will be complete is the greater, the more
individual economic agents there are.

II.8.66

It is otherwise when disturbances occur in the community as a whole, of a kind to
alter the ratio existing between the individual's stock of money and his demand for
it. Such disturbances, of course, cannot have an effect except by altering the
subjective valuations of the individual; but they are social economic phenomena in
the sense that they influence the subjective valuations of a large number of
individuals, if not simultaneously and in the same degree, at least in the same
direction, so that there must necessarily be some resultant effect on the objective
exchange value of money.

II.8.67

In the history of money a particularly important part has been played by those
variations in its objective exchange value that have arisen in consequence of an
increase in the stock of money while the demand for it has remained unchanged or
has at least not increased to the same extent. These variations, in fact, were what
first attracted the attention of economists; it was in order to explain them that the
quantity theory of money was first propounded. All writers have dealt most
thoroughly with them. It is perhaps justifiable, therefore, to devote special attention
to them and to use them to illuminate certain important theoretical points.

II.8.68

In whatever way we care to picture to ourselves the increase in the stock of money,
whether as arising from increased production or importation of the substance of
which commodity money is made, or through a new issue of fiat or credit money,

II.8.69

not have involved an increase in the quantity of commodity money, then the
increase of money cannot be regarded as an increase of the income or wealth of
society.
An increase in a community's stock of money always means an increase in the
amount of money held by a number of economic agents, whether these are the
issuers of fiat or credit money or the producers of the substance of which
commodity money is made. For these persons, the ratio between the demand for
money and the stock of it is altered; they have a relative superfluity of money and a
relative shortage of other economic goods. The immediate consequence of both
circumstances is that the marginal utility to them of the monetary unit diminishes.
This necessarily influences their behavior in the market. They are in a stronger
position as buyers. They will now express in the market their demand for the
objects they desire more intensively than before; they are able to offer more money
for the commodities that they wish to acquire. It will be the obvious result of this
that the prices of the goods concerned will rise, and that the objective exchange
value of money will fall in comparison.

II.8.70

But this rise of prices will by no means be restricted to the market for those goods
that are desired by those who originally have the new money at their disposal. In
addition, those who have brought these goods to market will have their incomes
and their proportionate stocks of money increased and, in their turn, will be in a
position to demand more intensively the goods they want, so that these goods will
also rise in price. Thus the increase of prices continues, having a diminishing
effect, until all commodities, some to a greater and some to a lesser extent, are
reached by it.*57

II.8.71

The increase in the quantity of money does not mean an increase of income for all
individuals. On the contrary, those sections of the community that are the last to be
reached by the additional quantity of money have their incomes reduced, as a
consequence of the decrease in the value of money called forth by the increase in
its quantity; this will be referred to later. The reduction in the income of these
classes now starts a countertendency, which opposes the tendency to a diminution
of the value of money due to the increase of income of the other classes, without
being able to rob it completely of its effect.

II.8.72

Those who hold the mechanical version of the quantity theory will be the more
inclined to believe that the increase in the quantity of money must eventually lead
to a uniform increase in the prices of all economic goods, the less clear their
concept is of the way in which the determination of prices is affected by it.
Thorough comprehension of the mechanism by means of which the quantity of
money affects the prices of commodities makes their point of view altogether
untenable. Since the increased quantity of money is received in the first place by a
limited number of economic agents only and not by all, the increase of prices at
first embraces only those goods that are demanded by these persons; further, it
affects these goods more than it afterward affects any others. When the increase of
prices spreads farther, if the increase in the quantity of money is only a single
transient phenomenon, it will not be possible for the differential increase of prices
of these goods to be completely maintained; a certain degree of adjustment will
take place. But there will not be such a complete adjustment of the increases that all
prices increase in the same proportion. The prices of commodities after the rise of
prices will not bear the same relation to each other as before its commencement;
the decrease in the purchasing power of money will not be uniform with regard to
different economic goods.

II.8.73

Hume, it may be remarked, bases his argument concerning this matter on the
supposition that every Englishman is miraculously endowed with five pieces of
gold during the night.*58 Mill rightly remarks on this, that it would not lead to a
uniform increase in the demand for separate commodities; the luxury articles of the
poorer classes would rise more in price than the others. All the same, he believes
that a uniform increase in the prices of all commodities, and this exactly in
proportion to the increase in the quantity of money, would occur, if "the wants and
inclinations of the community collectively in respect to consumption" remained the
same. He assumes, no less artificially than Hume, that "to every pound, or shilling,
or penny, in the possession of any one, another pound, shilling, or penny were
suddenly added."*59 But Mill fails to see that even in this case a uniform rise of
prices would not occur, even supposing that for each member of the community the
proportion between stock of money and total wealth was the same, so that the
addition of the supplementary quantity of money did not result in an alteration of
the relative wealth of individuals. For, even in this quite impossible case, every
increase in the quantity of money would necessarily cause an alteration in the
conditions of demand, which would lead to a disparate increase in the prices of the
individual economic goods. Not all commodities would be demanded more
intensively, and not all of those that were demanded more intensively would be
affected in the same degree. *60

II.8.74

There is no justification whatever for the widespread belief that variations in the
quantity of money must lead to inversely proportionate variations in the objective
exchange value of money, so that, for example, a doubling of the quantity of
money must lead to a halving of the purchasing power of money.

II.8.75

Even assuming that in some way or other—it is confessedly difficult to imagine in
what way—very individual's stock of money were to be increased so that his
relative position as regards other holders of property was unaltered, it is not
difficult to prove that the subsequent variation in the objective exchange value of
money would not be proportioned to the variation in the quantity of money. For, in
fact, the way in which an individual values a variation in the quantity of money at
his disposal is by no means directly dependent on the amount of this variation; but
we should have to assume that it was, if we wished to conclude that there would be
a proportionate variation in the objective exchange value of money. If the possessor
of a units of money receives b additional units, then it is not at all true to say that
he will value the total stock a + b exactly as highly as he had previously valued the
stock a alone. Because he now has disposal over a larger stock, he will now value
each unit less than he did before; but how much less will depend upon a whole
series of individual circumstances, upon subjective valuations that will be different
for each individual. Two individuals who are equally wealthy and who each
possess a stock of money a, will not by any means arrive at the same variation in
their estimation of money after an increase of b units in each of their stocks of
money. It is nothing short of absurdity to assume that, say, doubling the amount of
money at the disposal of an individual must lead to a halving of the exchange value
that he ascribes to each monetary unit. Let us, for example, imagine an individual
who is in the habit of holding a stock of a hundred kronen and assume that a sum of
a further hundred kronen is paid by somebody or other to this individual. Mere
consideration of this example is sufficient to show the complete unreality of all the
theories that ascribe to variations in the quantity of money a uniformly
proportionate effect on the purchasing power of money. For it involves no essential
modification of this example to assume that similar increases in the quantity of
money are experienced by all the members of the community at once.

II.8.76

The mistake in the argument of those who suppose that a variation in the quantity
of money results in an inversely proportionate variation in its purchasing power lies

II.8.77

of money results in an inversely proportionate variation in its purchasing power lies
in its starting point. If we wish to arrive at a correct conclusion, we must start with
the valuations of separate individuals; we must examine the way in which an
increase or decrease in the quantity of money affects the value scales of
individuals, for it is from these alone that variations in the exchange ratios of goods
proceed. The initial assumption in the arguments of those who maintain the theory
that changes in the quantity of money have a proportionate effect on the purchasing
power of money is the proposition that if the value of the monetary unit were
doubled, half of the stock of money at the disposal of the community would yield
the same utility as that previously yielded by the whole stock. The correctness of
this proposition is not disputed; nevertheless, it does not prove what it is meant to
prove.
In the first place, it must be pointed out that the levels of the total stock of money
and of the value of the money unit are matters of complete indifference as far as the
utility obtained from the use of the money is concerned. Society is always in
enjoyment of the maximum utility obtainable from the use of money. Half of the
money at the disposal of the community would yield the same utility as the whole
stock, even if the variation in the value of the monetary unit was not proportioned
to the variation in the stock of money. But it is important to note that it by no
means follows from this that doubling the quantity of money means halving the
objective exchange value of money. It would have to be shown that forces emanate
from the valuations of individual economic agents which are able to bring about
such a proportionate variation. This can never be proved; in fact, its contrary is
likely. We have already given a proof of this for the case in which an increase of
the quantity of money held by individual economic agents involves at the same
time an increase of their income or wealth. But even when the increase in the
quantity of money does not affect the wealth or income of the individual economic
agents, the effect is still the same.

II.8.78

Let us assume that a man gets half his income in the form of interest-bearing
securities and half in the form of money; and that he is in the habit of saving threequarters of his income, and does this by retaining the securities and using that half
of his income which he receives in cash in equal parts for paying for current con
sumption and for the purchase of further securities. Now let us assume that a
variation in the composition of his income occurs, so that he receives three-quarters
of it in cash and only one-quarter in securities. From now on this man will use twothirds of his cash receipts for the purchase of interest-bearing securities. If the price
of the securities rises or, which is the same thing, if their rate of interest falls, then
in either case he will be less willing to buy and will reduce the sum of money that
he would otherwise have employed for their purchase; he is likely to find that the
advantage of a slightly increased reserve exceeds that which could be obtained
from the acquisition of the securities. In the second case he will doubtless be
inclined to pay a higher price, or more correctly, to purchase a greater quantity at
the higher price, than in the first case. But he will certainly not be prepared to pay
double as much for a unit of securities in the second case as in the first case.

II.8.79

As far as the earlier exponents of the quantity theory are concerned, the assumption
that varia tions in the quantity of money would have an inversely proportionate
effect on its purchasing power may nevertheless be excusable. It is easy to go
astray on this point if the attempt is made to explain the value phenomena of the
market by reference to exchange value. But it is inexplicable that those theorists
also who suppose they are taking their stand on the subjective theory of value could
fall into similar errors. The blame here can only be laid to the account of a
mechanical conception of market processes. Thus even Fisher and Brown, whose

II.8.80

concept of the quantity theory is a mechanical one, and who attempt to express in
mathematical equations the law according to which the value of money is
determined, necessarily arrive at the conclusion that variations in the ratio between
the quantity of money and the demand for it lead to proportionate variations in the
objective exchange value of money. *61 How and through what channels this comes
about is not disclosed by the formula, for it contains no reference at all to the only
factors that are decisive in causing variations of the exchange ratios, that is,
variations in the subjective valuations of individuals.
Fisher and Brown give three examples to prove the correctness of their
conclusions. In the first, they start with the supposition that the government
changes the denomination of the money, so that, for example, what was previously
called a half-dollar is now called a whole dollar. It is obvious, they say, that this
will cause an increase in the number of dollars in circulation and that prices
reckoned in the new dollars will have to be twice as high as they were previously.
Fisher and Brown may be right so far, but not in the conclusions that they proceed
to draw. What their example actually deals with is not an increase in the quantity of
money but merely an alteration in its name. What does the "money" referred to in
this example really consist of? Is it the stuff of which dollars are made, the claim
that lies behind a credit dollar, the token that is used as money, or is it the word
dollar?

II.8.81

The second example given by Fisher and Brown is no less incorrectly interpreted.
They start from the assumption that the government divides each dollar into two
and mints a new dollar from each half. Here again all that occurs is a change of
name.

II.8.82

In their third example they do at least deal with a real increase in the quantity of
money. But this example is just as artificial and misleading as those of Hume and
Mill which we have already dealt with in some detail. They suppose that the
government gives everybody an extra dollar for each dollar that he already
possesses. We have already shown that even in this case a proportionate change in
the objective exchange value of money cannot follow.

II.8.83

One thing only can explain how Fisher is able to maintain his mechanical quantity
theory. To him the quantity theory seems a doctrine peculiar to the value of money;
in fact, he contrasts it outright with the laws of value of other economic goods. He
says that if the world's stock of sugar increases from a million pounds to a million
hundredweight, it would not follow that a hundredweight would have the value that
is now possessed by a pound. Money only is peculiar in this respect, according to
Fisher. But he does not give a proof of this assertion. With as much justification as
that of Fisher and Brown for their mechanical formula for the value of money, a
similar formula could be set out for the value of any commodity, and similar
conclusions drawn from it. That nobody attempts to do this is to be explained
simply and solely by the circumstance that such a formula would so clearly
contradict our experience of the demand curves for most commodities, that it could
not be maintained even for a moment.

II.8.84

If we compare two static economic systems, which differ in no way from one
another except that in one there is twice as much money as in the other, it appears
that the purchasing power of the monetary unit in the one system must be equal to
half that of the monetary unit in the other. Nevertheless, we may not conclude from
this that a doubling of the quantity of money must lead to a halving of the
purchasing power of the monetary unit; for every variation in the quantity of
money introduces a dynamic factor into the static economic system. The new
position of static equilibrium that is established when the effects of the fluctuations

II.8.85

position of static equilibrium that is established when the effects of the fluctuations
thus set in motion are comple ted cannot be the same as that which existed before
the introduction of the additional quantity of money. Consequently, in the new state
of equilibrium the conditions of demand for money, given a certain exchange value
of the monetary unit, will also be different. If the purchasing power of each unit of
the doubled quantity of money were halved, the unit would not have the same
significance for each individual under the new conditions as it had in the static
system before the increase in the quantity of money. All those who ascribe to
variations in the quantity of money an inverse proportionate effect on the value of
the monetary unit are applying to dynamic conditions a method of analysis that is
only suitable for static conditions.
It is also entirely incorrect to think of the quantity theory as if the characteristics in
question affecting the determination of value were peculiar to money. Most of both
the earlier and the later adherents of the theory have fallen into this error, and the
fierce and often unfair attacks that have been directed against it appear in a better
light when we know of this and other errors of a like kind of which its champions
have been guilty.

II.8.86

9 Criticism of Some Arguments Against the Quantity Theory
We have already examined one of the objections that have been brought against the
quantity theory: the objection that it only holds good ceteris paribus. No more
tenable as an objection against the determinateness of our conclusions is reference
to the possibility that an additional quantity of money may be hoarded. This
argument has played a prominent role in the history of monetary theory; it was one
of the sharpest weapons in the armory of the opponents of the quantity theory.
Among the arguments of the opponents of the currency theory it immediately
follows the proposition relating to the elasticity of cash-economizing methods of
payment, to which it also bears a close relation as far as its content is concerned.
We shall deal with it here separately; nevertheless all that we can say about it in the
present place needs to be set in its proper light by the arguments contained in the
third part of this book, which is devoted to the doctrine of fiduciary media.

II.8.87

For Fullarton, hoards are the regular deus ex machina. They absorb the superfluous
quantity of money and prevent it from flowing into circulation until it is needed. *62
Thus they constitute a sort of reservoir which accommodates the ebb and flow of
money in the market to the variations in the demand for money. The sums of
money collected in hoards lie there idle, waiting for the moment when commerce
needs them for maintaining the stability of the objective exchange value of money;
and all those sums of money, that might threaten this stability when the demand for
money decreases, flow back out of circulation into these hoards to slumber quietly
until they are called forth again. This tacitly assumes*63 the fundamental correctness
of the arguments of the quantity theory, but asserts that there is nevertheless a
principle inherent in the economic system that always prevents the working out of
the processes that the quantity theory describes.

II.8.88

But Fullarton and his followers unfortunately neglected to indicate the way in
which variations in the demand for money set in motion the mechanism of the
hoards. Obviously they supposed this to proceed without the will of the transacting
parties entering into the matter at all. Such a view surpasses the naivest versions of
the quantity theory in its purely mechanical conception of market transactions.
Even the most superficial investigation into the proble m of the demand for money
could not have failed to demonstrate the untenability of the doctrine of hoards.

II.8.89

In the first place, it must be recognized that from the economic point of view there
is no such thing as money lying idle. All money, whether in reserves or literally in
circulation (that is, in process of changing hands at the very moment under
consideration), is devoted in exactly the same way to the performance of a
monetary function. *64 In fact, since money that is surrendered in an exchange is
immediately transferred from the ownership of the one party to that of the other,
and no period of time can be discovered in which it is actually in movement, all
money must be regarded as at rest in the cash reserve of some individual or other
The stock of money of the community is the sum of the stocks of individuals; there
is no such thing as errant money, no money which even for a moment does not
form part of somebody's stock. All money, that is to say, lies in some individual's
stock, ready for eventual use. It is a matter of indifference how soon the moment
occurs when a demand for money next arises and the sum of money in question is
paid out. In every household or family the members of which are at least
moderately prosperous there is a minimum reserve whose level is constantly
maintained by replenishment. (The fact has already been mentioned, that besides
objective conditions, subjective factors influencing the individual economic agent
help to determine the amount of the individual demand for money.) What is called
storing money is a way of using wealth. The uncertainty of the future makes it
seem advisable to hold a larger or smaller part of one's possessions in a form that
will facilitate a change from one way of using wealth to another, or transition from
the ownership of one good to that of another, in order to preserve the opportunity
of being able without difficulty to satisfy urgent demands that may possibly arise in
the future for goods that will have to be obtained by way of exchange. So long as
the market has not reached a stage of development in which all, or at least certain,
economic goods can be sold (that is, turned into money) at any time under
conditions that are not too unfavorable, this aim can be achieved only by holding a
stock of money of a suitable size. The more active the life of the market becomes,
the more can this stock be diminished. At the present day, the possession of certain
sorts of securities which have a large market so that they can be realized without
delay and without very considerable loss, at least in normal times, may make the
holding of large cash reserves to a certain extent unnecessary.

II.8.90

The demand for money for storage purposes is not separable from the demand for
money for other purposes. Hoarding money is nothing but the custom of holding a
greater stock of it than is usual with other economic agents, at other times, or in
other places. The hoarded sums of money do not lie idle, whether they are regarded
from the social or from the individual point of view. They serve to satisfy a
demand for money just as much as any other money does. Now the adherents of the
banking principle seem to hold the opinion that the demand for storing purposes is
elastic and conforms to variations in the demand for money for other purposes in
such a way that the total demand for money, that is, that for storing purposes and
that for other purposes taken together, adjusts itself to the existing stock of money
without any variation in the objective exchange value of the monetary unit. This
view is entirely mistaken. In fact, the conditions of demand for money, including
the demand for storage purposes, is independent of the circumstances of the supply
of money. The contrary supposition can be supported only by supporting a
connection between the quantity of money and the rate of interest,*65 that is, by
asserting that the variations arising from changes in the ratio between the demand
for money and the supply of it, influence to a different degree the prices of goods
of the first order and those of goods of higher orders, so that the proportion
between the prices of these two classes of goods is altered. The question of the
tenability of this proposition, which is based on the view that the rate of interest is
dependent on the greater or lesser quantity of money, will have to be brought up
again in part three. There the opportunity will also arise for showing that the cash

II.8.91

again in part three. There the opportunity will also arise for showing that the cash
reserves of the banks that issue fudiciary media no more act as a buffer in this way
than these mythical hoards do. There is no such thing as a "reserve store" of money
out of which commerce can at any time supply its extra requirements or into which
it can direct its surpluses.
The doctrine of the importance of hoards for stabilizing the objective exchange
value of money has gradually lost its adherents with the passing of time. Nowadays
its supporters are few. Even Diehl's membership of this group is only apparent. He
agrees, it is true, with the criticism directed by Fullarton against the currency
theory. On the other hand, he concedes that Fullarton's expressions inert and
dormant are erroneously applied to reserves of money; since these reserves are not
idle but merely serve a different purpose from that served by circulating money; he
also agrees that sums of money in such reserves and sums used for purposes of
payment are not sharply distinguishable, and that the same sums serve now one
purpose and now the other. In spite of this, however, he supports Fullarton as
against Ricardo. He says that, even if the sums taken out of the reserves must again
be replaced out of the stocks of money present in the community; this need not
occur immediately; a long period may elapse before it is necessary; and that in any
case it follows that the mechanical connection which Ricardo assumes to exist
between the quantity of money in circulation and the prices of commodities cannot
be accepted, even with regard to hoards.*66 Diehl does not show in greater detail
why a long period may elapse before the sums supposed to be taken from the
reserves are replaced. But he does admit the fundamental correctness of the
criticism leveled at Fullarton's arguments; it is possible to grant the sole reservation
that he makes if we interpret it as meaning that time may and must elapse before
changes in the quantity of money express themselves all over the market in a
variation of the objective exchange value of money. For that the increase in
individuals' stocks of money which results from the inflow of the additional
quantity of money must bring about a change in the subjective valuations of the
individuals, and that this occurs immediately and begins immediately to have an
effect in the market, can hardly be denied. On the other hand, an increase in an
individual's demand for money while his stock remains the same, or a decrease of
his stock while his demand remains the same, must lead at once to changes in
subjective valuations which must be expressed in the market, even if not all at
once, in an increase of the objective exchange value of money. It may be admitted
that every variation in the quantity of money will impel the individual to check his
judgment as to the extent of his requirements for money and that this may result in
a reduction of his demand in the case of a diminishing stock of money and an
augmentation of it in the case of an increasing stock, but the assumption that such a
limitation or extension must occur has no logical foundation, not to speak of the
assumption that it must occur in such a degree as to keep the objective exchange
value of money stable.

II.8.92

A weightier objection is the denial of the practical importance of the quantity
theory, that is implied in the attribution to the present organization of the money,
payment, and credit system of a tendency to cancel out variations in the quantity of
money and prevent them from becoming effective. It is said that the fluctuating
velocity of circulation of money, and the elasticity of methods of payment made
possible by the credit system and the progressive improvement of banking
organization and technique, that is, the facility with which methods of payment can
be adjusted to expanded or contracted business, have made the movement of prices
as far as is possible independent of variations in the quantity of money, especially
since there exists no quantitative relation between money and its substitutes, that is,

II.8.93

between the stock of money and the volume of transactions and payments. It is said
that if in such circumstances we still wish to preserve the quantity theory we must
not base it merely upon current money but "extend it to embrace all money
whatever, including not only all the tangible money substitutes that are capable of
circulation, but also every transaction of the banking system or agreement between
two parties to a contract that replaces a payment of money." It is admitted that this
would make the theory quite useless in practice, but it would secure its theoretical
universality. And it is not denied that this raises an almost insoluble problem—that
of the conditions under which credit comes into being and of the manner in which
it affects the determination of values and prices.*67
The answer to this is contained in the third part of the present work, where the
problem of the alleged elasticity of credit is discussed.*68

II.8.94

10 Further Applications of the Quantity Theory
In general the quantity theory has not been used for investigating the consequences
that would follow a decrease in the demand for money while the stock of money
remained the same. There has been no historical motive for such an investigation.
The problem has never been a live one; for there has never been even a shadow of
justification for attempting to solve controversial questions of economic policy by
answering it. Economic history shows us a continual increase in the demand for
money. The characteristic feature of the development of the demand for money is
its intensification; the growth of division of labor and consequently of exchange
transactions, which have constantly become more and more indirect and dependent
on the use of money, have helped to bring this about, as well as the increase of
population and prosperity. The tendencies which result in an increase in the
demand for money became so strong in the years preceding the war that even if the
increase in the stock of money had been very much greater than it actually was, the
objective exchange value of money would have been sure to increase. Only the
circumstance that this increase in the demand for money was accompanied by an
extraordinarily large expansion of credit, which certainly exceeded the increase in
the demand for money in the broader sense, can serve to explain the fact that the
objective exchange value of money during this period not only failed to increase,
but actually decreased. (Another factor that was concerned in this is referred to
later in this chapter.)

II.8.95

If we were to apply the mechanical version of the quantity theory to the case of a
decrease in the demand for money while the stock of money remained unaltered,
we should have to conclude that there would be a uniform increase in all
commodity prices, arithmetically proportional to the change in the ratio between
the stock of money and the demand for it. We should expect the same results as
would follow upon an increase of the stock of money while the demand for it
remained the same. But the mechanical version of the theory, based as it is upon an
erroneous transference of static law to the dynamic sphere, is just as inadequate in
this case as in the other It cannot satisfy us because it does not explain what we
want to have explained. We must build up a theory that will show us how a
decrease in the demand for money while the stock of it remains the same affects
prices by affecting the subjective valuations of money on the part of individual
economic agents. A diminution of the demand for money while the stock remained
the same would in the first place lead to the discovery by a number of persons that
their cash reserves were too great in relation to their needs. They would therefore
enter the market as buyers with their surpluses. From this point, a general rise in
prices would come into operation, a diminution of the exchange value of money.
More detailed explanation of what would happen then is unnecessary.

II.8.96

Very closely related to this case is another, whose practical significance is
incomparably greater. Even if we think of the demand for money as constantly
increasing it may happen that the demand for particular kinds of money
diminishes, or even ceases altogether so far as it depends upon their characteristics
as general media of exchange, and this is all we have to deal with here. If any given
kind of money is deprived of its monetary characteristics, then naturally it also
loses the special value that depends on its use as a common medium of exchange,
and only retains that value which depends upon its other employment. In the course
of history this has always occurred when a good has been excluded from the
constantly narrowing circle of common media of exchange. Generally speaking, we
do not know much about this process, which to a large extent took place in times
about which our information is scanty. But recent times have provided an
outstanding example: the almost complete demonetization of silver. Silver, which
previously was widely used as money, has been almost entirely expelled from this
position, and there can be no doubt that at a time not very far off, perhaps even in a
few years only, it will have played out its part as money altogether. The result of
the demonetization of silver has been a diminution of its objective exchange value.
The price of silver in London fell from 60 9/10d. on an average in 1870 to 23
12/16d. on an average in 1909. Its value was bound to fall, because the sphere of its
employment had contracted. Similar examples can be provided from the history of
credit money also. For instance, the notes of the southern states in the American
Civil War may be mentioned, which as the successes of the northern states
increased, lost pari passu their monetary value as well as their value as claims.*69

II.8.97

More deeply than with the problem of the consequences of a diminishing demand
for money while the stock of it remains the same, which possesses only a small
practical importance, the adherents of the quantity theory have occupied
themselves with the problem of a diminishing stock of money while the demand for
it remains the same and with that of an increasing demand for money while the
stock of it remains the same. It was believed that complete answers to both
questions could easily be obtained in accordance with the mechanical version of the
quantity theory, if the general formula, which appeared to embrace the essence of
the problems, was applied to them. Both cases were treated as inversions of the
case of an increase in the quantity of money while the demand for it remained the
same; and from this the corresponding conclusions were drawn. Just as the attempt
was made to explain the depreciation of credit money simply by reference to the
enormous increase in the quantity of money, so the attempt was made to explain
the depression of the seventies and eighties by reference to an increase of the
demand for money while the quantity of money did not increase sufficiently. This
proposition lay at the root of most of the measures of currency policy of the
nineteenth century. The aim was to regulate the value of money by increasing or
diminishing the quantity of it. The effects of these measures appeared to provide an
inductive proof of the correctness of this superficial version of the quantity theory,
and incidentally concealed the weaknesses of its logic. This supposition alone can
explain why no attempt was ever made to exhibit the mechanism of the increase of
the value of money as a result of the decrease in the volume of circulation. Here
again the old theory needs to be supplemented, as has been done in our argument
above.

II.8.98

Normally the increase in the demand for money is slow, so that any effect on the
exchange ratio between money and commodities is discernible only with difficulty.
Nevertheless, cases do occur in which the demand for money in the narrower sense
increases suddenly and to an unusually large degree, so that the prices of
commodities drop suddenly. Such cases occur when the public loses faith in an
issuer of fiduciary media at a time of crisis, and the fiduciary media cease to be

II.8.99

issuer of fiduciary media at a time of crisis, and the fiduciary media cease to be
capable of circulation. Many examples of this sort are known to history (one of
them is provided by the experiences of the United States in the late autumn of
1907), and it is possible that similar cases may occur in the future.
(III) A Special Cause of Variations in the
Objective Exchange Value of Money Arising from the
Peculiarities of Indirect Exchange
11 "Dearness of Living"
Those determinants of the objective exchange value of money that have already
been considered exhibit no sort of special peculiarity. So far as they are concerned,
the exchange value of money is determined no differently from the exchange value
of other economic goods. But there are other determinants of variations in the
objective exchange value of money which obey a special law.

II.8.100

No complaint is more widespread than that against "dearness of living." There has
been no generation that has not grumble d about the "expensive times" that it lives
in. But the fact that "everything" is becoming dearer simply means that the
objective exchange value of money is falling. It is extraordinarily difficult, if not
impossible, to subject such assertions as this to historical and statistical tests. The
limits of our knowledge in this direction will have to be referred to in the chapter
dealing with the problem of the measurability of variations in the value of money.
Here we must be content to anticipate the conclusions of this chapter and state that
we can expect no support from investigations into the history of prices or from the
methods employed in such investigations. The statements of the average man, even
though it may very easily happen that these are founded on self-deception and even
though they are so much at the mercy of variations in the subjective valuations of
the individual, would almost form a better substantiation of the fact of a
progressive fall in the objective exchange value of money than can be provided by
all the contents of voluminous statistical publications. Certainty can be afforded
only by demonstration that chains of causes exist, which are capable of evoking
this sort of movement in the objective exchange value of money and would evoke
it unless they were cancelled by some counteracting force. This path, which alone
can lead to the desired goal, has already been trodden by many investigators-with
what success, we shall see.

II.8.101

12 Wagner's Theory: The Influence of the Permanent Predominance of the
Supply Side over the Demand Side on the Determination of Prices
With many others, and in agreement with general popular opinion, Wagner
assumes the predominance of a tendency toward the diminution of the objective
exchange value of money. He holds that this phenomenon can be explained by the
fact that the supply side is almost invariably the stronger and the most capable of
pursuing its own acquisitive interest. Even apart from actual cartels, rings, and
combinations, and in spite of all the competition of individual sellers among
themselves, he claims that the supply side has more solidarity than the opposing
demand side. He argues further that the tradesmen engaged in retail trade are more
interested in an increase of prices than their customers are in the continuance of the

II.8.102

as a kind of permanent pressure in the direction of higher prices, more energetically
and more universally than the opposing tendency on the demand side. Prices
certainly are kept down and re duced in retail trade with the object of maintaining
and expanding sales and increasing total profits, and competition may, and often
does, make this necessary. But neither influence, according to Wagner, is in the
long run so generally and markedly effective as the interest in and striving for
higher prices, which is in fact able to compete with and overcome their resistance.
In this permanent predominance of the supply side over the demand side, Wagner
sees one of the causes of the general increases in prices.*70
Wagner, that is to say, attributes the progressive fall in the objective exchange
value of money to a series of factors which have no effect on the determination of
wholesale prices but only in the determination of retail prices. Now it is a wellknown phenomenon that the retail prices of consumption goods are affected by
numerous influences which prevent them from responding rapidly and completely
to movements of wholesale prices. And, among the peculiar determinants of retail
prices, those predominate which tend to keep them above the level corresponding
to wholesale prices. It is, for instance, well known that retail prices adapt
themselves more slowly to decreases in wholesale prices than to increases. But it
must not be overlooked that the adjustment must eventually take place, all the
same, and that the retail prices of consumption goods always participate in the
movements of the prices of production goods, even if they lag behind them; and
that it is only small, transient movements in wholesale trade that have no effect on
retail trade.

II.8.103

Even if we were willing to admit the existence of a permanent predominance of the
supply side over the demand side, it would still be decidedly questionable whether
we could deduce a tendency toward a general increase of dearness from it. If no
further cause could be shown to account for an increase of wholesale prices—and
Wagner does not attempt this at all—then we can argue a progressive increase of
retail prices only if we are prepared to assume that the time lag between the
movements of retail and of wholesale prices is continually increasing. But Wagner
makes no such assumption; and it would be very difficult to support it, if he did. It
may be said, in fact, that modern commercial development has brought about a
tendency toward a more rapid adjustment of retail prices to wholesale and
manufacturers' prices. Multiple and chain stores and cooperative societies follow
the movements of wholesale prices much more closely than peddlers and small
shopkeepers.

II.8.104

It is entirely incomprehensible why Wagner should connect this tendency to a
general rise of prices, arising from the predominance of the supply side over the
demand side, with the individualistic system of free competition or freedom of
trade, and declare that it is under such a system that the tendency is clearest and
operates with the greatest force and facility. No proof is given of this assertion,
which is probably a consequence of Wagner's antipathy to economic liberalism;
neither could one easily be devised. The more developed the freedom of trade, the
more easily and quickly are movements in wholesale prices reflected in retail
prices, especially downward movements. Where legislative and other limitations on
freedom of trade place small producers and retailers in a favored position, the
adjustment is slower and sometimes complete adjustment may even be prevented
altogether.

II.8.105

A striking example of this is afforded by the Austrian attempts during the last
generation to favor craftsmen and small shopkeepers in their competition against
factories and large stores, together with the subsequent considerable rise in prices
between 1890 and 1914. It is not under free competition that the conditions which

II.8.106

between 1890 and 1914. It is not under free competition that the conditions which
Wagner calls the permanent predominance of the supply side over the demand side
are most strongly in evidence, but in those circumstances where the development of
free competition is opposed by the greatest obstacles.
13 Wieser's Theory: The Influence on the Value of Money Exerted by a Change
in the Relations Between Natural Economy and Money Economy
Wieser's attempt*71 to explain an increase in the money prices of goods
unaccompanied by any considerable change in their value in terms of other goods,
is not entirely satisfactory either. He holds the opinion that most of the changes in
the value of money that have actually occurred are to be attributed to changes in the
relations between the "natural economy" (Naturalwirtschaft) and the "money
economy" (Geldwirtschaft). When the money economy flourishes, the value of
money is reduced; when it decays, the value of money rises again. In the early
stages of a money economy most wants are still satisfied by the methods of the
natural economy. The family is self-supporting; it lives in its own house, and itself
produces the greater part of what it needs; the sale of its products constitutes only a
supplementary source of income. Consequently, the cost of living of the producer,
or, what comes to the same thing, the value of his labor, is not fully allowed for or
not allowed for at all in the cost of the products that are sold; all that is included is
the cost of the raw materials used and the wear and tear of those tools or other
instruments that have had to be specially constructed, which in any case do not
amount to much under conditions of extensive production. So it is with the buyer
also; the wants that he satisfies by purchase are not among his more important
wants and the use-values that he has to estimate are not very great.

II.8.107

Then gradually all this changes. The extension of the sphere of the money economy
introduces into cost calculations factors that were not included before but were
dealt with on "natural economic" principles. The list of the costs that are reckoned
in monetary terms grows longer, and each new element in the cost calculation is
estimated by comparison with the factors already expressed in money, and added to
them, with the effect of raising prices. Thus a general rise of prices occurs, but this
is not interpreted as a consequence of changes in supply conditions, but as a fall in
the value of money.

II.8.108

According to Wieser, if it is not possible to explain the increasing rise in the prices
of commodities as originating in monetary factors alone (that is, in variations in the
relations between the supply of money and the demand for it), then we must seek
another reason for these changes in the general level of prices. Now it is impossible
to find the reason by reference to such fluctuations in the values of commodities as
are caused by factors belonging to the commodity side of the price ratio; for
nowadays we are not worse supplied with goods than our forefathers were. But, to
Wieser, no other explana tion seems more natural than that which attributes the
diminution of the purchasing power of money to the extension of the money
economy which was its historical accompaniment. For Wieser, in fact, it is this
very inertia of prices which has helped to bring about the change in the value of
money during each period of fresh progress; it must have been this that caused the
older prices to be raised by the amount of the additional values involved whenever
new factors were co-opted into that part of the process of production that was
regulated by the money economy. But the higher the money prices of commodities
rise, the lower must the value of money fall in comparison. Increasing dearness
thus appears as an inevitable symptom of the development of a growing money
economy.

II.8.109

It cannot be denied that this argument of Wieser's reveals important points in
connection with the market and the determination of prices, which, if followed up,
have important bearings on the determination of the exchange ratios between the
various economic goods other than money. Nevertheless, so far as Wieser's
conclusions relate to the determination of money prices, they exhibit serious
shortcomings. In any case, before his argument could be accepted as correct, it
would have to be proved that, not forces emanating from the money side, but only
forces emanating from the commodity side, are here involved. Not the valuation of
money, but only that of the commodities, could have experienced the
transformation supposed to be manifested in the alteration of the exchange ratio.

II.8.110

But the chain of reasoning as a whole must be rejected. The development of
facilities for exchanging means that the new recruits to the economy increase their
subjective valuations of those goods which they wish to dispose of. Goods which
they previously valued solely as objects of personal use are now valued
additionally on account of their exchangeability for other goods. This necessarily
involves a rise in their subjective value in the eyes of those who possess them and
are offering them for exchange. Goods which are to be disposed of in exchange are
now no longer valued in terms of the use-value that they would have had for their
owners if consumed by them, but in terms of the use-value of the goods that may
be obtained in exchange for them. The latter value is always higher than the former,
for exchanges only occur when they are profitable to both of the parties concerned.

II.8.111

But on the other hand—and Wieser does not seem to have thought of this—the
subjective value of the goods acquired in exchange sinks. The individuals
acquiring them no longer ascribe to them the significance corresponding to their
position in a subjective scale of values (Wertskala) or utilities (Nutzenskala), they
ascribe to them only the smaller significance that belongs to the other goods that
have to be surrendered in order to get them.

II.8.112

Let us suppose that the scale of values of the possessor of an apple, a pear, and a
glass of lemonade, is as follows:

II.8.113

1. An apple
2. A piece of cake
3. A glass of lemonade
4. A pear

If now this man is given the opportunity of exchanging his pear for a piece of cake,
this opportunity will increase the significance that he attaches to the pear. He will
now value the pear more hig hly than the lemonade. If he is given the choice
between relinquishing either the pear or the lemonade, he will regard the loss of the
lemonade as the lesser evil. But this is balanced by his reduced valuation of the
cake. Let us assume that our man possesses a piece of cake, as well as the pear, the
apple, and the lemonade. Now if he is asked whether he could better put up with
the loss of the cake or of the lemonade, he will in any case prefer to lose the cake,
because he can make good this loss by surrendering the pear, which ranks below
the lemonade in his scale of values. The possibility of exchange introduces
considerations of the objective exchange value of goods into the economic
decisions of every individual; the original primary scale of use-values is replaced
by the derived secondary scale of exchange values and use-values, in which
economic goods are ranked not only with regard to their use-values, but also
according to the value of the goods that can be obtained for them in exchange.
There has been a transposition of the goods; the order of their significance has been

There has been a transposition of the goods; the order of their significance has been
altered. But if one good is placed higher, then—there can be no question of it—
some other must be placed lower. This arises simply from the very nature of the
scale of values, which constitutes nothing but an arrangement of the subjective
valuations in order of the significance of the objects valued.
The extension of the sphere of exchange has the same effects on objective
exchange values as on subjective values. Here also every increase of value on the
one side must be opposed by a decrease of value on the other side. In fact the
alteration of an exchange ratio between two goods in such a way that both become
dearer is inconceivable. And this cannot be avoided by the interposition of money.
When it is asserted that the objective exchange value of money has experienced an
alteration, some special cause for this must be demonstrated, apart from the bare
fact of the extension of the sphere of exchange. But nobody has ever provided this
demonstration.

II.8.114

Wieser commences by contrasting, after the fashion of economic historians, the
natural economy and the money economy. These terms fail to provide that
scientific abstraction of concepts that is the indispensable basis of all theoretical
investigation. It remains uncertain whether the contrast of an exchangeless state
with an order of society based upon exchange is intended, or a contrast between
conditions of direct exchange and of indirect exchange based upon the use of
money. It seems most likely that Wieser intends to contrast an exchangeless state
with one of exchange through money. This is certainly the sense in which the
expressions natural economy and money economy are used by economic
historians; and this definition corresponds to the actual course of economic history
after the full development of the institution of money. Nowadays, when new
geographical areas or new spheres of consumption are brought within the scope of
exchange, there is a direct transition from the exchangeless state to that of the
money economy; but this has not always been so. And in any case the economist
must make a clear distinction.

II.8.115

Wieser speaks of the townsman who is in the habit of spending his summer holiday
in the country and of always finding cheap prices there. One year, when this
townsman goes on holiday he finds that prices have suddenly become higher all
round; the village has meanwhile been brought within the scope of the money
economy. The farmers now sell their milk and eggs and poultry in the town and
demand from their summer visitors the prices that they can hope to get at market.
But what Wieser describes here is only half the process. The other half is worked
out in the town, where the milk, eggs, and poultry coming on the market from the
newly tapped sources of supply in the village exhibit a tendency toward a reduction
of price. The inclusion of what has hitherto been a natural economy within the
scope of an exchange system involves no one-sided rise of prices, but a leveling of
prices. The contrary effect would be evoked by any contraction of the scope of the
exchange system; it would have an inherent tendency to increase the differences
between prices. Thus we should not use this phenomenon, as Wieser does, to
substantiate propositions about variations in the objective exchange value of
money.

II.8.116

14 The Mechanism of the Market as a Force Affecting the Objective Exchange
Value of Money
Nevertheless, the progressive rise of prices and its complement, the fall in the value
of money, may quite well be explained from the monetary side, by reference to the
nature of money and monetary transactions.

II.8.117

The modern theory of prices has stated all its propositions with a view to the case
of direct exchange. Even where it does include indirect exchange within the scope
of its considerations, it does not take sufficient account of the peculiarity of that
kind of exchange which is dependent upon the help of the common medium of
exchange, or money. This, of course, does not constitute an objection to the modern
theory of prices. The laws of price determination which it has established for the
case of direct exchange are also valid for the case of indirect exchange, and the
nature of an exchange is not altered by the use of money. Nevertheless, the
monetary theorist has to contribute an important addition to the general theory of
prices.

II.8.118

If a would-be buyer thinks that the price demanded by a would be seller is too high,
because it does not correspond to his subjective valuations of the goods in question,
a direct exchange will not be feasible unless the would-be seller reduces his
demands. But by indirect exchange, with money entering into the case, even
without such a reduction there is still a possibility that the transaction may take
place. In certain circumstances the would-be buyer may decide to pay the high
price demanded, if he can hope similarly to obtain a better price than he had
reckoned upon for those goods and services that he himself has to dispose of. In
fact, this would very often be the best way for the would-be buyer to obtain the
greatest possible advantage from the transaction. Of course, this will not be true, as
in the case of transactions like those of the stock exchange, or in individual
bargaining, when both parties cooperate immediately in the determination of prices
and consequently are able to give direct expression to their subjective estimates of
commodity and medium of exchange. But there are cases in which prices appear to
be determined one-sidedly by the seller, and the buyer is obliged to abstain from
purchase when the price demanded is too high. In such a case, when the abstention
of the purchaser indicates to the seller that he has overreached his demand, the
seller may reduce his price again (and, of course, in so doing, may possibly go too
far, or not far enough). But under certain conditions a different procedure may be
substituted for this roundabout process. The buyer may agree to the price
demanded and attempt to recoup himself elsewhere by screwing up the prices of
the goods that he himself has for sale. Thus a rise in the price of food may cause
the laborers to demand higher wages. If the entrepreneurs agree to the laborers'
demands, then they in turn will raise the prices of their products, and then the food
producers may perhaps regard this rise in the price of manufactured goods as a
reason for a new rise in the price of food. Thus increases in prices are linked
together in an endless chain, and nobody can indicate where the beginning is and
where the end, or which is cause and which effect.

II.8.119

In modern selling policies "fixed prices" play a large part. It is customary for
cartels and trusts and in fact all monopolists, including the state, to fix the prices of
their products independently, without consulting the buyers; they appear to
prescribe prices to the buyer. The same is often true in retail trade. Now this
phenomenon is not accidental. It is an inevitable phenomenon of the unorganized
market. In the unorganized market, the seller does not come into contact with all of
the buyers, but only with single individuals or groups. Bargaining with these few
persons would be useless, for it is not their valuations alone but those of all the
would-be purchasers of the good in question that are decisive for price
determination. Consequently the seller fixes a price that in his opinion corresponds
approximately to what the price ought to be (in which it is understandable that he is
more likely to aim too high than too low), and waits to see what the buyers will do.
In all of those cases in which he alone appears to fix prices, he lacks exact
knowledge of the buyers' valuations. He can make more or less correct assumptions
about them, and there are merchants who by close observation of the market and of

II.8.120

about them, and there are merchants who by close observation of the market and of
the psychology of buyers have become quite remarkably expert at this; but there
can be no certainty. In fact, estimates often have to be made of the effects of
uncertain and future processes. The sole way by which sellers can arrive at reliable
knowledge about the valuations of consumers is the way of trial and error
Therefore they raise prices until the abstention of the buyers shows them that they
have gone too far. But even though the price may seem too high, given the current
value of money the buyer may still pay it if he can hope in the same way to raise
the price which he "fixes" and believes that this will lead more quickly to his goal
than abstention from purchasing, which might not have its full effect for a long
time and might also involve a variety of inconveniences to him. In such
circumstances the seller is deprived of his sole reliable check upon the
reasonableness of the prices he demands. He sees that these prices are paid, thinks
that the profits of his business are increasing proportionately, and only gradually
discovers that the fall in the purchasing power of money deprives him of part of the
advantage he has gained. Those who have carefully traced the history of prices
must agree that this phenomenon repeats itself a countless number of times. It
cannot be denied that much of this passing on of price increases has indeed reduced
the value of money, but has by no means altered the exchange ratios between other
economic goods in the intended degree.
In order to guard against any possible misunderstanding, it should be explicitly
stated that there is no justification for drawing the conclusion from this that all
increases of prices can be passed on in this way, and so perhaps for assuming that
there is a fixed exchange ratio between the different economic goods and human
efforts. To be consistent, we should then have to ascribe the rise in the money
prices of goods to the vain efforts of human greed. A rise in the money price of a
commodity does as a rule modify its exchange ratio to the other commodities,
although not always in the same degree as that in which its exchange ratio to
money has been altered.

II.8.121

The champions of the mechanical version of the quantity theory may perhaps admit
the fundamental correctness of this line of argument, but still object that every
variation in the objective exchange value of money that does not start from changes
in the relations between the supply of money and the demand for it must be
automatically self-correcting. If the objective exchange value of money falls, then
the demand for money must necessarily increase, since in order to cope with the

II.8.122

decrease in the purchasing power of money is completely canceled. Quite as
justifiably, the contrary assumption might also be hazarded, name1y that the
avoidance of unnecessary expenditure forced upon the individual by the rise of
prices would lead to a revision of views concerning the necessary level of cash
reserves and that the resultant decision would certainly be not for an increase, but
rather for even a decrease, in the amount of money to be held.
But here again it must be observed that this is a matter of a variation brought about
through dynamic agencies. The static state, for which the contention attributed to
the adherents of the mechanical version of the quantity theory would be valid, is
disturbed by the fact that the exchange ratios between individual commodities are
necessarily modified. Under certain conditions, the technique of the market may
have the effect of extending this modification to the exchange ratio between money
and other economic goods also. *72

II.8.123

(IV) Excursuses
15 The Influence of the Size of the Monetary Unit and Its Subdivisions on the
Objective Exchange Value of Money
The assertion is often encountered that the size of the monetary unit exerts a certain
influence on the determination of the exchange ratio between money and the other
economic goods. In this connection the opinion is expressed that a large monetary
unit tends to raise the money prices of commodities while a small monetary unit is
likely to increase the purchasing power of money. Considerations of this sort
played a notable part in Austria at the time of the currency regulation of the year
1892 and were decisive in causing the new krone, or half-gulden, to be substituted
for the previous, larger, unit, the gulden. So far as this assertion touches the
determination of wholesale prices, it can hardly be seriously maintained. But in
retail trade the size of the monetary unit admittedly has a certain significance,
which, however, must not be overestimated. *73

II.8.124

Money is not indefinitely divisible. Even with the assistance of money substitutes
for expressing fractional sums that for technical reasons cannot conveniently be
expressed in the actual monetary material (a method that has been brought to
perfection in the modern system of token coinage), it seems entirely impossible to
provide commerce with every desired fraction of the monetary unit in a form

II.8.125

of the currency of the German Reich (equivalent to 1/27900 kg. of gold) could not
be expressed in coins of the Austrian krone currency; eleven heller (equivalent to
11/328000 kg. of gold) were too little, twelve heller (equivalent to 3/82000 kg. of
gold) were too much. Consequently there had to be small differences between
prices which otherwise would have been kept equal in both countries.*74
This tendency is intensified by the circumstance that the prices of particularly
common goods and services are usually expressed, not merely in such fractions of
the monetary unit as can be expressed in coins, but in amounts corresponding as
nearly as possible to the denominations of the coinage. Everybody is familiar with
the tendency toward "rounding off" which retail prices exhibit, and this is based
almost entirely on the denominations of money and money substitutes. Still greater
is the significance of the denominations of the coinage in connection with certain
prices for which custom prescribes payment "in round figures." The chief examples
of this are tips, fees, and the like.

II.8.126

16 A Methodological Comment
In a review devoted to the first edition of this book,*75 Professor Walter Lotz deals
with the criticism that I have brought forward against Laughlin's explanation of the
value of the Austrian silver gulden in the years 1879-92.*76 His arguments are
particularly interesting, inasmuch as they offer an excellent opportunity of
exemplifying the difference that exists between the conception and solution of
problems in modern economic theory based on the subjective theory of value on
the one hand, and under the empirico-realistic treatment of the historically and
sociopolitically oriented schools of Schmoller and Brentano on the other.

II.8.127

According to Professor Lotz it is "a question of taste" whether my arguments are
"recognized as having any value." He does not "find them impressive." He says that
he himself was not at first able to agree with Laughlin's view, until "Laughlin
mentioned information, which makes his arguments at least very probable."
Laughlin, in fact, told him that "in the eighties he received the information from the
leading house of Viennese high finance, that people were reckoning with the fact
that the paper gulden would be eventually converted at some rate or other."
Professor Lotz adds to this: "Certainly it was also of importance that the circulation
of paper gulden and silver gulden was quantitatively very moderate, and that these
means of payment were accepted by the public banks at their nominal value. All
the same, the expectations for the future that the leading house of Viennese high
finance had reason to nurse cannot have been quite without effect on the
international valuation of the Austrian paper gulden. Consequently it may be
justifiable in view of this information to ascribe some weight to Laughlin's
argument, in spite of von Mises."

II.8.128

The mysterious communication made to Laughlin by "the leading house of
Viennese high finance," and handed on by him to Professor Lotz, was a secret de
Polichinelle. The innumerable articles devoted to the question of the standard that
appeared during the eighties in the Austrian and Hungarian papers, especially in the
Neue Freie Presse, always assumed that Austria -Hungary would go over to the

II.8.129

converted into gold, and the national debt certificates into gulden, how did it come
about that the interest-bearing national debt bonds were valued less highly than the
gulden notes and coined gulden which did not bear interest? That is what we have
to explain. It is obvious that our problem is only just beginning at the point where it
is finished with for Professor Lotz.
It is true that Professor Lotz is prepared to admit that it was "also of importance"
that the circulation of paper gulden and silver gulden was "quantitatively very
moderate"; and he grants the validity of yet a third explanation in addition, namely
that this means of payment was accepted by the Treasury at its nominal value. But
the relationship of these explanatio ns to each other remains obscure. Possibly it has
not occurred to Professor Lotz that the first and second are difficult to reconcile.
For if the gulden was valued only in consideration of its eventual conversion into
gold, it is fair to assume that it could have made no difference whether more or
fewer gulden were in circulation, so long, say, as the funds available for conversion
were not limited to a given amount. The third attempt at an explanation is
altogether invalid, since the "nominal value" of the gulden was only the "gulden"
over again and the very point at issue is to account for the purchasing power of the
gulden.

II.8.130

The sort of procedure that Professor Lotz adopts here for solving a problem of
economic science must necessarily end in failure. It is not enough to collect the
opinions of businessmen—even if they are "leading" men or belong to "leading"
houses—and then serve them up to the public, garnished with a few on the one
hand's and on the other hand's, an admittedly or so, and a sprinkling of all the
same's. The collection of "facts" is not science, by a long way. There are no
grounds for ascribing authoritative significance to the opinions of businessmen; for
economics, these opinions are nothing more than material, to be worked upon and
evaluated. When the businessman tries to explain anything he becomes as much a
"theorist" as anybody else; and there is no reason for giving a preference to the
theories of the practical merchant or farmer. It is, for instance, impossible to prove
the cost-of-production theory of the older school by invoking the innumerable
assertions of businessmen that "explain" variations in prices by variations in costs
of production.

II.8.131

Nowadays there are many who, busied with the otiose accumulation of material,
have lost their understanding for the specifically economic in the statement and
solution of problems. It is high time to remember that economics is something
other than the work of the reporter whose business it is to ask X the banker and Y
the commercial magnate what they think of the economic situation.

CHAPTER 9
The Problem of the Existence of Local Differences in the Objective Exchange
Value of Money
1 Interlocal Price Relations
Let us at first ignore the possibility of various kinds of money being employed side
by side, and assume that in a given district one kind of money serves exclusively as
the common medium of exchange. The problem of the reciprocal exchange ratios
of different kinds of money will then form the subject matter of the next chapter In
this chapter, however, let us imagine an isolated geographical area of any size
whose inhabitants engage in mutual trade and use a single good as common
medium of exchange. It makes no immediate difference whether we think of this
region as composed of several states, or as part of one large state, or as a particular
individual state. It will not be necessary until a later stage in our argument to
mention certain incidental modifications of the general formula which result from
differences in the legal concepts of money in different states.

II.9.1

It has already been mentioned that two economic goods, which are of similar
constitution in all other respects, are not to be regarded as members of the same
species if they are not both ready for consumption at the same place. For many
purposes it seems more convenient to regard them as goods of different species
related to one another as goods of higher and lower orders.*77 Only in the case of
money is it permissible in certain circumstances to ignore the factor of position in
space. For the utility of money, in contrast to that of other economic goods, is to a
certain extent free from the limitations of geographical distance. Checks and
clearing systems, and similar institutions, have a tendency to make the use of
money more or less independent of the difficulties and costs of transport. They
have had the effect of permitting gold stored in the cellars of the Bank of England,
for instance, to be used as a common medium of exchange anywhere in the world.
We can easily imagine a monetary organization which, by the exclusive use of
notes or clearinghouse methods, allows all transfers to be made with the
instrumentality of sums of money that never change their position in space. If we
assume, further, that the costs associated with every transaction are not influenced
by the distance between the two parties to the contract and between each of them
and the place where the money is (it is well known that this condition is already
realized in some cases; for example, in the charges made for postal and moneyorder services), then there is sufficient justification for ignoring differences in the
geographical situation of money. But a corresponding abstraction with regard to
other economic goods would be inadmissible. No institution can make it possible
for coffee in Brazil to be consumed in Europe. Before the consumption good
"coffee in Europe" can be made out of the production good "coffee in Brazil," this
production good must first be combined with the complementary good "means of
transport."

II.9.2

If differences due to the geographical position of money are disregarded in this
way, we get the following law for the exchange ratio between money and other
economic goods: every economic good, that is ready for consumption (in the sense
in which that phrase is usually understood in commerce and technology), has a
subjective use-value qua consumption good at the place where it is and qua
production good at those places to which it may be brought for consumption. These
valuations originate independently of each other; but, for the determination of the
exchange ratio between money and commodities, both are equally important. The
money price of any commodity in any place, under the assumption of completely

II.9.3

money price of any commodity in any place, under the assumption of completely
unrestricted exchange and disregarding the differences arising from the time taken
in transit, must be the same as the price at any other place, augmented or
diminished by the money cost of transport.
Now there is no further difficulty in including in this formula the cost of transport
of money, or a further factor, on which the banker and exchange dealer lay great
weight, namely, the costs arising from the recoinage which may be necessary. All
these factors, which it is not necessary to enumerate in further detail, have a
combined effect on the foreign exchange rate (cable rate, etc.) the resultant of
which must be included in our calculation as a positive or negative quantity. To
prevent any possible misunderstanding, it should once more be explicitly remarked
that we are concerned here only with the rate of exchange between places in which
the same kind of money is in use, although it is a matter of indifference whether the
same coins are legal tender in both places. The essentially different problems of the
rate of exchange between different kinds of money will not occupy us until the
following chapter.

II.9.4

2 Alleged Local Differences in the Purchasing Power of Money
In contrast to the law of interlocal price relations that has just been explained is the
popular belief in local variations in the purchasing power of money. The assertion
is made again and again that the purchasing power of money may be different in
different markets at the same time, and statistical data are continually being
brought forward to support this assertion. Few economic opinions are so firmly
rooted in the lay mind as this. Travelers are in the habit of bringing it home with
them, usually as a piece of knowledge gained by personal observation. Few visitors
to Austria from Germany at the beginning of the twentieth century had any doubts
that the value of money was higher in Germany than in Austria. That the objective
exchange value of gold, our commodity money
, stood at different
levels in different parts of the world, passed for established truth in even economic
literature.*78

II.9.5

We have seen where the fallacy lies in this, and may spare ourselves unnecessary
repetition. It is the leaving out of account of the positional factor in the nature of
economic goods, a relic of the crudely materialist conception of the economic

II.9.6

merely to take account of costs of transport and of customs duties and indirect
taxes. The effect of direct taxes, for example, the burden of which is to a large
extent transferable also, must be included in the calculation.
It seems better to us to use the terminology suggested above, which stresses with
greater clearness that the purchasing power of money shows a tendency to come to
the same level throughout the world, and that the alleged differences in it are
almost entirely explicable by differences in th e quality of the commodities offered
and demanded, so that there is only a small and almost negligible remainder left
over, that is due to differences in the quality of the offered and demanded money.

II.9.7

The existence of the tendency itself is hardly questioned. But the force which it
exerts, and hence its importance also, are estimated variously, and the old classical
proposition, that money like every other commodity always seeks out the market in
which it has the highest value, is said to be mistaken. Wieser has said in this
connection that the monetary transactions involved in exchange are induced by the
commodity transactions; that they constitute an auxiliary movement, which
proceeds only so far as is necessary to permit the completion of the principal
movement. But the international movement of commodities, Wieser declares, is
even nowadays noticeably small in comparison with domestic trade. The
transmitted national equilibrium of prices is broken through for relatively few
commodities whose prices are world prices. Consequently, the transmitted value of
money is still for the most part as significant as ever. It will not be otherwise until,
in place of the national organization of production and labor which still prevails
today, a complete world organization has been established; but it will be a long
while before this happens. At present the chief factor of production, labor, is still
subject to national limitations everywhere; a nation adopts foreign advances in
technique and organization only to the degree permitted by its national
characteristics, and, in general, does not very easily avail itself of opportunities of
work abroad, whereas within the nation entrepreneurs and wage laborers move
about to a considerable extent. Consequently, wages everywhere retain the national
level at which they have been historically determined, and thus the most important
element in costs remains nationally determined at this historical level; and the same
is true of most other cost elements. On the whole, the transmitted value of money
forms the basis of further social calculations of costs and values. Meanwhile, the
international contacts are not yet strong enough to raise national methods of
production on to a single world level and to efface the differences in the transmitted
national exchange values of money. *79

II.9.8

It is hardly possible to agree with these arguments, which smack a little too much
of the cost-of-production theory of value and are certainly not to be reconciled with
the principles of the subjective theory. Nobody would wish to dispute the fact that
costs of production differ greatly from one another in different localities. But it
must be denied that this exercises an influence on the price of commodities and on

II.9.9

differences in the prices of commodities whose natures are technologically
identical are to be explained on the one hand by differences in the cost of preparing
them for consumption (expenses of transport, cost of retailing, etc.) and on the
other hand by the physical and legal obstacles that restrict the mobility of
commodities and human beings.
3 Alleged Local Differences in the Cost of Living
There is a certain connection between the assertion of local differences in the
purchasing power of money and the widespread belief in local differences in the
cost of living. It is supposed to be possible "to live" more cheaply in some places
than in others. It might be supposed that both statements come to the same thing,
and that it makes no difference whether we say that the Austrian crown was
"worth" less in 1913 than the eighty-five pfennigs which corresponded to its gold
value, or that "living" was dearer in Austria than in Germany. But this is not
correct. The two propositions are by no means identical. The opinion that living is
more expensive in one place than in another in no way implies the proposition that
the purchasing power of money is different. Even with complete equality of the
exchange ratio between money and other economic goods it may happen that an
individual is involved in unequal costs in securing the same level of satisfaction in
different places. This is especially likely to be the case when residence in a certain
place awakens wants which the same individual would not have been conscious of
elsewhere. Such wants may be social or physical in nature. Thus, the Englishman
of the richer classes is able to live more cheaply on the Continent, because he is
obliged to fulfill a series of social duties at home that do not exist for him abroad.
Again, living in a large town is dearer than in the country if only because the
immediate propinquity in town of so many possibilities of enjoyment stimulates
desires and calls forth wants that are unknown to the provincial. Those who often
visit theaters, concerts, art exhibitions, and similar places of entertainment,
naturally spend more money than those who live in otherwise similar
circumstances, but have to go without these pleasures. The same is true of the
physical wants of human beings. In tropical areas, Europeans have to take a series
of precautions for the protection of health which would be unnecessary in the
temperate zones. All those wants whose origin is dependent on local circumstances
demand for their satisfaction a certain stock of goods which would otherwise be
used for the satisfaction of other wants, and consequently they diminish the degree
of satisfaction that a given stock of goods can afford.

II.9.10

Hence, the statement that the cost of living is different in different localities only
means that the same individual cannot secure the same degree of satisfaction from
the same stock of goods in different places. We have just given one reason for this
phenomenon. But, besides this, the belief in local differences in the cost of living is
also supported by reference to local differences in the purchasing power of money.
It would be possible to prove the incorrectness of this view. It is no more
appropriate to speak of a difference between the purchasing power of money in
Germany and in Austria than it would be justifiable to conclude from differences
between the prices charged by hotels on the peaks and in the valleys of the Alps
that the objective exchange value of money is different in the two situations and to
formulate some such proposition as that the purchasing power of money varies
inversely with the height above sea level. The purchasing power of money is the
same everywhere; only the commodities offered are not the same. They differ in a
quality that is eco nomically significant—the position in space of the place at
which they are ready for consumption.

II.9.11

But although the exchange ratios between money and economic goods of
completely similar constitution in all parts of a unitary market area in which the

II.9.12

completely similar constitution in all parts of a unitary market area in which the
same sort of money is employed are at any time equal to one another, and all
apparent exceptions can be traced back to differences in the spatial quality of the
commodities, it is nevertheless true that price differentials evoked by the difference
in position (and hence in economic quality) of the commodities may under certain
circumstances constitute a subjective justification of the assertion that there are
differences in the cost of living. He who voluntarily visits Karlsbad on account of
his health would be wrong in deducing from the higher price of houses and food
there that it is impossible to get as much enjoyment from a given sum of money in
Karlsbad as elsewhere and that consequently living is dearer there. This conclusion
does not allow for the difference in quality of the commodities whose prices are
being compared. It is just because of this difference in quality, just because it has a
certain value for him, that the visitor comes to Karlsbad. If he has to pay more in
Karlsbad for the same quantity of satisfactions, this is due to the fact that in paying
for them he is also paying the price of being able to enjoy them in the immediate
neighborhood of the medicinal springs. The case is different for the businessman
and laborer and official who are merely tied to Karlsbad by their occupations. The
propinquity of the waters has no significance for the satisfaction of their wants, and
so their having to pay extra on account of it for every good and service that they
buy will, since they obtain no additional satisfaction from it, appear to them as a
reduction of the possibilities of the enjoyment that they mig ht otherwise have. If
they compare their standard of living with that which they could achieve with the
same expenditure in a neighboring town, they will arrive at the conclusion that
living is really dearer at the spa than elsewhere. They will then only transfer their
activity to the dearer spa if they believe that they will be able to secure there a
sufficiently higher money income to enable them to achieve the same standard of
living as elsewhere. But in comparing the standards of satisfaction attainable they
will leave out of account the advantage of being able to satisfy their wants in the
spa itself because this circumstance has no value in their eyes. Every kind of wage
will therefore, under the assumption of complete mobility, be higher in the spa than
in other, cheaper, places. This is generally known as far as it applies to contract
wages; but it is also true of official salaries. The government pays a special bonus
to those of its employees who have to take up their duties in "dear" places, in order
to put them on a level with those functionaries who are able to live in cheaper
places. The laborers too have to be compensated by higher wages for the higher
cost of living.
This also is the clue to the meaning of the sentence, "Living is dearer in Austria
than in Germany," a sentence which has a certain meaning even though there is no

II.9.13

strangers in a foreign land. But most people are spared the trouble of such a choice;
for most, staying at home is a matter of necessity, emigration an impossibility.
To recapitulate: the exchange ratio subsisting between commodities and money is
everywhere the same. But men and their wants are not everywhere the same, and
neither are commodities. Only if these distinctions are ignored is it possible to
speak of local differences in the purchasing power of money or to say that living is
dearer in one place than in another.

II.9.14

CHAPTER 10
The Exchange Ratio Between Money of Different Kinds
1 The Twofold Possibility of the Coexistence of Different Kinds of Money
The existence of an exchange ratio between two sorts of money is dependent upon
both being used side by side, at the same time, by the same economic agents, as
common media of exchange. We could perhaps conceive of two economic areas,
not connected in any other way, being linked together only by the fact that each
exchanged the commodity it used for money against that used for money by the
other, in order then to use the acquired monetary commodity otherwise than as
money. But this would not be a case of an exchange ratio between different kinds
of money simply arising from their monetary employment. If we wish successfully
to conduct our investigation as an investigation into the theory of money, then even
in the present chapter we must disregard the nonmonetary uses of the material of
which commodity money is made; or, at least, take account of them only where this
is necessary for the complete clarification of all the processes connected with our
problem. Now the assertion that, apart from the effects of the industrial use of the
monetary material, an exchange ratio can be established between two sorts of
money only when both are used as money simultaneously and side by side, is not
the usual view. That is to say, prevailing opinion distinguishes two cases: that in
which two or more domestic kinds of money exist side by side in the parallel
standard, and that in which the money in exclusive use at home is of a kind
different from the money used abroad. Both cases are dealt with separately,
although there is no theoretical difference between them as far as the determination
of the exchange ratio between the two sorts of money is concerned.

II.10.1

If a gold-standard country and a silver-standard country have business relations
with each other and constitute a unitary market for certain economic goods, then it
is obviously incorrect to say that the common medium of exchange consists of gold
only for the inhabitants of the gold-standard country, and of silver only for those of

II.10.2

areas. Whether the case is one of an exchange through the instrumentality of money
used once or used more than once, the only important point is that the existence of
international trade relations results in the consequence that the money of each of
the single areas concerned is money also for all the other areas
It is true that there are important differences between that money which plays the
chief part in domestic trade, is the instrument of most exchanges, predominates in
the dealings between consumers and sellers of consumption goods, and in loan
transactions, and is recognized by the law as legal tender, and that money which is
employed in relatively few transactions, is hardly ever used by consumers in their
purchases, does not function as an instrument of loan operations, and is not legal
tender. In popular opinion, the former money only is domestic money, the latter
foreign money. Although we cannot accept this if we do not want to close the way
to an understanding of the problem that occupies us, we must nevertheless
emphasize that it has great significance in other connections. We shall have to
come back to it in the chapter which deals with the social effects of fluctuations in
the objective exchange value of money.

II.10.3

2 The Static or Natural Exchange Ratio Between Different Kinds of Money
For the exchange ratio between two or more kinds of money, whether they are
employed side by side in the same country (the parallel standard) or constitute what
is popularly called foreign money and domestic money, it is the exchange ratio
between individual economic goods and the individual kinds of money that is
decisive. The different kinds of money are exchanged in a ratio corresponding to
the exchange ratios existing between each of them and the other economic goods. If
1 kg. of gold is exchanged for m kg. of a particular sort of commodity, and 1 kg. of
silver for m/15 1/2 kg. of the same sort of commodity, then the exchange ratio
between gold and silver will be established at 15 1/2. If some disturbance tends to
alter this ratio between the two sorts of money, which we shall call the static or
natural ratio, then automatic forces will be set in motion that will tend to reestablish
it.*80

II.10.4

Let us consider the case of two countries each of which carries on its domestic

II.10.5

have slowly developed with the development of their monetary position.
If no other relations than those of barter exist between the inhabitants of two areas,
then balances in favor of one party or the other cannot arise. The objective
exchange values of the quantities of commodities and services surrendered by each
of the contracting parties must be equal, whether present goods or future goods are
involved. Each constitutes the price of the other. This fact is not altered in any way
if the exchange no longer proceeds directly but indirectly through the
intermediaryship of one or more common media of exchange. The surplus of the
balance of payments that is not settled by the consignment of goods and services
but by the transmission of money was long regarded merely as a consequence of
the state of international trade. It is one of the great achievements of Classical
political economy to have exposed the fundamental error involved in this view. It
demonstrated that international movements of money are not consequences of the
state of trade; that they constitute not the effect, but the cause, of a favorable or
unfavorable trade balance. The precious metals are distributed among individuals
and hence among nations according to the extent and intensity of their demands for
money. No individual and no nation need fear at any time to have less money than
it needs. Government measures designed to regulate the international government
of money in order to ensure that the community shall have the amount it needs, are
just as unnecessary and inappropriate as, say intervention to ensure a sufficiency or
corn or iron or the like. This argument dealt the Mercantilist theory its death
blow.*81

II.10.6

Nevertheless statesmen are still greatly exercised by the problem of the
international distribution of money. For hundreds of years, the Midas theory,
systematized by Mercantilism, has been the rule followed by governments in taking
measures of commercial policy. In spite of Hume, Smith, and Ricardo, it still
dominates men's minds more than would be expected. Phoenixlike, it rises again
and again from its own ashes. And indeed it would hardly be possible to overcome
it with objective argument; for it numbers its disciples among that great host of the
half-educated who are proof against any argument, however simple, if it threatens
to rob them of longcherished illusions that have become too dear to part with. It is
only regrettable that these lay opinions not only predominate in discussions of
economic policy on the part of legislators, the press—even the technical journals—
and businessmen, but still occupy much space even in scientific literature. The
blame for this must again be laid to the account of obscure notions concerning the
nature of fiduciary media and their significance as regards the determination of
prices. The reasons which, first in England and then in all other countries, were
urged in favor of the limitation of the fiducia ry note issue have never been
understood by modern writers, who know them only at secondhand or thirdhand.
That they in general plead for their retention, or only demand such modifications as
leave the principle untouched, merely expresses their reluctance to replace an
institution which on the whole has indubitably justified itself by a system whose
effects they, to whom the phenomena of the market constitute an insoluble riddle,
are naturally least of all able to foresee. When these writers seek for a motive in
present-day banking policy, they can find none but that characterized by the slogan,
"Protection of the national stock of the precious metals." We can pass the more
lightly over these views in the present place since we shall have further opportunity
in part three to discuss the true meaning of the bank laws that limit the note issue.

II.10.7

Money does not flow to the place where the rate of interest is highest; neither is it
true that it is the richest nations that attract money to themselves. The proposition is
as true of money as of every other economic good, that its distribution among
individual economic agents depends on its marginal utility. Let us first completely
abstract from all geographical and political concepts, such as country and state, and

II.10.8

abstract from all geographical and political concepts, such as country and state, and
imagine a state of affairs in which money and commodities are completely mobile
within a unitary market area. Let us further assume that all payments, other than
those cancelled out by offsetting or mutual balancing of claims, are made by
transferring money, and not by the cession of fiduciary media; that is to say, that
uncovered notes and deposits are unknown. This supposition, again, is similar to
that of the "purely metallic currency" of the English Currency School, although
with the help of our precise concept of fiduciary media we are able to avoid the
obscurities and shortcomings of their point of view. In a state of affairs
corresponding to these suppositions of ours, all economic goods, including of
course money, tend to be distributed in such a way that a position of equilibrium
between individuals is reached, when no further act of exchange that any individual
could undertake would bring him any gain, any increase of subjective value. In
such a position of equilibrium, the total stock of money, just like the total stocks of
commodities, is distributed among individuals according to the intensity with
which they are able to express their demand for it in the market. Every
displacement of the forces affecting the exchange ratio between money and other
economic goods brings about a corresponding change in this distribution, until a
new position of equilibrium is reached. This is true of individuals, but it is also true
of all the individuals in a given area taken together. For the goods possessed and
the goods demanded by a nation are only the sums of the goods possessed and the
goods demanded by all the economic agents, private as well as public, which make
up the nation, among which the state as such admittedly occupies an important
position, but a very far from dominant one.
Trade balances are not causes but merely concomitants of move ments of money.
For if we look beneath the veil with which the forms of monetary transactions
conceal the nature of exchanges of goods, then it is clear that, even in international
trade, commodities are exchanged for commodities, through the instrumentality of
money. Just as the single individual does, so also all the individuals in an economic
community taken together, wish in the last analysis to acquire not money, but other
economic goods. If the state of the balance of payments is such that movements of
money would have to occur from one country to the other, independently of any
altered estimation of money on the part of their respective inhabitants, then
operations are induced which reestablish equilibrium. Those persons who receive
more money than they need will hasten to spend the surplus again as soon as
possible, whether they buy production goods or consumption goods. On the other
hand, those persons whose stock of money falls below the amount they need will
be obliged to increase their stock of money, either by restricting their purchases or
by disposing of commodities in their possession. The price variations, in the
markets of the countries in question, that occur for these reasons, give rise to
transactions which must always reestablish the equilibrium of the balance of
payments. A credit or debit balance of payments that is not dependent upon an
alteration in the conditions of demand for money can only be transient.*82

II.10.9

Thus international movements of money, so far as they are not of a transient nature
and consequently soon rendered ineffective by movements in the contrary
direction, are always called forth by variations in the demand for money. Now it
follows from this that a country in which fiduciary media are not employed is never
in danger of losing its stock of money to other countries. Shortage of money and
superabundance of money can no more be a permanent experience for a nation than
for an individual. Ultimately they are spread out uniformly among all economic
agents using the same economic good as common medium of exchange, and

II.10.10

the adjustment between the stock of money and the demand for it are finally
uniform for all economic agents. Measures of economic policy which aim at
increasing the quantity of money circulating in a country could be successful so far
as the money circulates in other countries also, only if they brought about a
displacement in relative demands for money. Nothing is fundamentally altered in
all this by the employment of fiduciary media. So far as there remains a demand for
money in the narrower sense despite the use of fiduciary media, it will express
itself in the same way.
There are many gaps in the Classical doctrine of international trade. It was built up
at a time when international exchange relations were largely limited to dealings in
present goods. No wonder, then, that its chief reference was to such goods or that it
left out of account the possibility of an international exchange of services, and of
present goods for future goods. It remained for a later generation to undertake the
expansion and correction here necessary, a task that was all the easier since all that
was wanted was a consistent expansion of the same doctrine to cover these
phenomena as well. The classical doctrine had further restricted itself to that part of
the problem presented by international metallic money. The treatment with which
credit money had to be content was not satisfactory, and this shortcoming has not
been entirely remedied yet. The problem has been regarded too much from the
point of view of the technique of the monetary system and too little from that of the
theory of exchange of goods. If the latter point of view had been adopted, it would
have been impossible to avoid commencing the investigation with the proposition
that the balance of trade between two areas with different currencies must always
be in equilibrium, without the emergence of a balance needing to be corrected by
the transport of money. *83 If we take a gold-standard and a silver-standard country
as an example, then there still remains the possibility that the money of the one
country will be put to a nonmonetary use in the other. Such a possibility must
naturally be ruled out of account. The relations between two countries with fiat
money would be the best example to take; if we merely make our example more
general by supposing that metallic money may be in use, then only the monetary
use of the metallic money must be considered. It is then immediately clear that
goods and services can only be paid for with other goods and services; that in the
last analysis there can be no question of payment in money.

CHAPTER 11
The Problem of Measuring the Objective Exchange Value of Money and
Variations in It
1 The History of the Problem
The problem of measuring the objective exchange value of money and its
variations has attracted much more attention than its significance warrants. If all
the columns of figures and tables and curves that have been prepared in this
connection could perform what has been promised of them, then we should
certainly have to agree that the tremendous expenditure of labor upon their
construction would not have been in vain. In fact, nothing less has been hoped from
them than the solution of the difficult questions connected with the problem of the
objective exchange value of money. But it is very well known, and has been almost
ever since the methods were discovered, that such aids cannot avail here.

II.11.1

The fact that, in spite of all this, the improvement of methods of calculating index
numbers is still worked at most zealously, and that they have even been able to
achieve a certain popularity that is otherwise denied to economic investigation,
may well appear puzzling. It becomes explicable if we take into account certain
peculiarities of the human mind. Like the king in Rückert's Weisheit des
Brahmanen, the layman always tends to seek for formulae that sum up the results
of scientific investigation in a few words. But the briefest and most pregnant
expression for such summaries is in figures. Simple numerical statement is sought
for even where the nature of the case excludes it. The most important results of
research in the social sciences leave the multitude apathetic, but any set of figures
awakens its interest. Its history becomes a series of dates, its economics a
collection of statistical data. No other objection is more often brought against
economics by laymen than that there are no economic laws; and if an attempt is
made to meet this objection, then almost invariably the request is made that an
example of such a law should be named and expounded—as if fragments of
systems, whose study demands years of thought on the part of the expert, could be
made intelligible to the novice in a few minutes. Only by letting fall morsels of
statistics is it possible for the economic theorist to maintain his prestige in the face
of questions of this sort.

II.11.2

Great names in the history of economics are associated with various systems of
index numbers. Indeed, it was but natural that the best brains should have been the
most attracted by this extraordinarily difficult problem. But in vain. Closer
investigation shows us how little the inventors of the various index-number
methods themselves thought of their attempts, how justly, as a rule, they were able
to estimate their importance. He who cares to go to the trouble of demonstrating the
uselessness of index numbers for monetary theory and the concrete tasks of
monetary policy will be able to select a good proportion of his weapons from the
writings of the very men who invented them.

II.11.3

2 The Nature of the Problem
The objective exchange value of the monetary unit can be expressed in units of any
individual commodity. Just as we are in the habit of speaking of a money price of
the other exchangeable goods, so we may conversely speak of the commodity price
of money, and have then so many expressions for the objective exchange value of
money as there are commercial commodities that are exchanged for money. But
these expressions tell us little; they leave unanswered the questions that we want to

II.11.4

these expressions tell us little; they leave unanswered the questions that we want to
solve. There are two parts to the problem of measuring the objective exchange
value of money. First we have to obtain numerical demonstration of the fact of
variations in the objective exchange value of money; then the question must be
decided whether it is possible to make a quantitative examination of the causes of
particular price movements, with special reference to the question whether it would
be possible to produce evidence of such variations in the purchasing power of
money as lie on the monetary side of the ratio. *84
So far as the first-named problem is concerned, it is self-evident that its solution
must assume the existence of a good, or complex of goods, of unchanging objective
exchange value. The fact that such goods are inconceivable needs no further
elucidation. For a good of this sort could exist only if all the exchange ratios
between all goods were entirely free from variations. With the continually varying
foundations on which the exchange ratios of the market ultimately rest, this
presumption can never be true of a social order based upon the free exchange of
goods.*85

II.11.5

To measure is to determine the ratio of one quantity to another which is invariable
or assumed to be invariable. Invariability in respect of the property to be measured,
or at least the legitimacy of assuming such invariability, is a sine qua non of all
measurement. Only when this assumption is admissible is it possible to determine
the variations that are to be measured. Then, if the ratio between the measure and
the object to be measured alter, this can only be referred to causes directly affecting
the latter. Thus the problems of measuring the two kinds of variation in the
objective exchange value of money go together. If the one is proved to be soluble,
then so also is the other; and proof of the insolubility of the one is also proof of the
insolubility of the other.

II.11.6

3 Methods of Calculating Index Numbers
Nearly all the attempts that have hitherto been made to solve the problem of
measuring the objective exchange value of money have started from the idea that if
the price movements of a large number of commodities were combined by a
particular method of calculation, the effects of those determinants of the price
movements which lie on the side of the commodities would largely cancel one
another out, and consequently, that such calculations would make it possible to
discover the direction and extent of the effects of those determinants of price
movements that lie on the monetary side. This assumption would prove correct,
and the inquiries instituted with its help could led to the desired results, if the
exchange ratios between the other economic goods were constant among
themselves. Since this assumption does not hold good, refuge must be taken in all
sorts of artificial hypotheses in order to obtain at least some sort of an idea of the
significance of the results gained. But to do this is to abandon the safe ground of

II.11.7

importance of the separate factors. Examination of the influence exerted by the
separate determinants of prices will never reach the stage of being able to
undertake numerical imputation among the different factors. All determinants of
prices have their effect only through the medium of the subjective estimates of
individuals; and the extent to which any given factor influences these subjective
estimates can never be predicted. Consequently, the evaluation of the results of
statistical investigations into prices, even if they could be supported by established
theoretical conclusions, would still remain largely dependent on the rough
estimates of the investigator, a circumstance that is apt to reduce their value
considerably. Under certain conditions, index numbers may do very useful service
as an aid to investigation into the history and statistics of prices; for the extension
of the theory of the nature and value of money they are unfortunately not very
important.
4 Wieser's Refinement of the Methods of Calculating Index Numbers
Very recently Wieser has made a new suggestion which constitutes an
improvement of the budgetary method of calculating index numbers, notably
employed by Falkner.*86 This is based on the view that when nominal wages change
but continue to represent the same real wages, then the value of money has
changed, because it expresses the same real quantity of value differently from
before, or because the ratio of the monetary unit to the unit of real value has
changed. On the other hand, the value of money is regarded as unchanged when
nominal wages go up or down, but real wages move exactly parallel with them. If
the contrast between money income and real income is substituted for that between
nominal and real wages and the whole sum of the individuals in the community
substituted for the single individual, then it is said to follow that such variations of
the total money income as are accompanied by corresponding variations of the total
real income do not indicate variations in the value of money at all, even if at the
same time the prices of goods have changed in accordance with the altered
conditions of supply. Only when the same real income is expressed by a different
money income has the specific value of money changed. Thus to measure the value
of money, a number of typical kinds of income should be chosen and the real
expenditure corresponding to each determined, that is, the quantity of each kind of
thing on which the incomes are spent. The money expenditure corresponding to
this real expenditure is also to be shown, all for a particular base year; and then for
each year the sums of money are to be evaluated in which the same quantities of
real value were represented, given the prices ruling at the time. The result, it is
claimed, would be the possibility of working out an average which would give for
the whole country the monetary expression, as determined year by year in the
market, of the real income taken as base. Thus it would be discovered whether a
constant real value had a constant, a higher, or a lower, money expression year by
year, and so a measure would be obtained of variations in the value of money. *87

II.11.8

The technical difficulties in the way of employing this method, which is the most
nearly perfect and the most deeply thought out of all methods of calculating index
numbers, are apparently insurmountable. But even if it were possible to master
them, this method could never fulfill the purpose that it is intended to serve. It
could attain its end only under the same supposition that would justify all other
methods; namely, the supposition that the exchange ratios between the individual
economic goods excluding money are constant, and that only the exchange ratio
between money and each of the other economic goods is liable to fluctuation. This
would naturally involve an inertia of all social institutions, of population, of the
distribution of wealth and income, and of the subjective valuations of individuals.
Where everything is in a state of flux the supposition breaks down completely.

II.11.9

It was impossible for this to escape Wieser, who insists on allowance for the fact
that the types of income and the classes into which the community is divided
gradually alter, and that in the course of time certain kinds of consumption are
discontinued and new kinds begun. For short periods, Wieser is of the opinion that
this involves no particular difficulty; that it would be easy to retain the
comparability of the totals by eliminating expenditures that did not enter into both
sets of budgets. For long periods, he recommends Marshall's chain method of
always including a sufficient number of transitional types and restricting
comparisons to any given type and that immediately preceding or following it. This
hardly does away with the difficulty. The farther we went back in history, the more
we should have to eliminate; ultimately it seems that only those portions of real
income would remain that serve to satisfy the most fundamental needs of existence.
Even within this limited scope, comparisons would be impossible, as, say, between
the clothing of the twentieth century and that of the tenth century. It is still less
possible to trace back historically the typical incomes, which would necessarily
involve consideration of the existing division of society into classes. The progress
of social differentiation constantly increases the number of types of income. And
this is by no means simply due to the splitting up of single types; the process is
much more complicated. Members of one group break off and intermingle with
other groups or portions of other groups in a most complicated manner. With what
type of income of the past can we compare that, say, of the modern factory worker?

II.11.10

But even if we were to ignore all these considerations, other difficulties would
arise. It is quite possible, even most probable, that subjective valuations of equal
portions of real income have altered in the course of time. Changes in ways of
living, in tastes, in opinions concerning the objective use value of individual
economic goods, evoke quite extraordinarily large fluctuations here, even in short
periods. If we do not take account of this in estimating the variations of the money
value of these portions of income, then new sources of error arise that may
fundamentally affect our results. On the other hand, there is no basis at all for
taking account of them.

II.11.11

All index-number systems, so far as they are intended to have a greater significance
for monetary theory than that of mere playing with figures, are based upon the idea
of measuring the utility of a certain quantity of money. *88 The object is to determine
whether a gram of gold is more or less useful today than it was at a certain time in
the past. As far as objective use value is concerned, such an investigation may
perhaps yield results. We may assume the fiction, if we like, that, say, a loaf of
bread is always of the same utility in the objective sense, always comprises the
same food value. It is not necessary for us to enter at all into the question of
whether this is permissible or not. For certainly this is not the purpose of index
numbers; their purpose is the determination of the subjective significance of the
quantity of money in question. For this, recourse must be had to the quite nebulous
and illegitimate fiction of an eternal human with invariable valuations. In Wieser's

II.11.12

and illegitimate fiction of an eternal human with invariable valuations. In Wieser's
typical incomes that have to be traced back through the centuries may be seen an
attempt to refine this fiction and to free it from its limitations. But even this attempt
cannot make the impossible possible, and was necessarily bound to fail. It
represents the most perfect conceivable development of the index-number system,
and the fact that this also leads to no practical result condemns the whole business.
Of course, this could not escape Wieser. If he neglected to lay particular stress
upon it, this is probably due solely to the circumstance that his concern was not so
much to indicate a way of solving this insoluble problem, as to extract from a usual
method all that could be got from it.
5 The Practical Utility of Index Numbers
The inadmissibility of the methods proposed for measuring variations in the value
of money does not obtrude itself too much if we only want to use them for solving
practical problems of economic policy. Even if index numbers cannot fulfill the
demands that theory has to make, they can still, in spite of their fundamental
shortcomings and the inexactness of the methods by which they are actually
determined, perform useful workaday services for the politician.

II.11.13

If we have no other aim in view than the comparison of points of time that lie close
to one another, then the errors that are involved in every method of calculating
numbers may be so far ignored as to allow us to draw certain rough conclusions
from them. Thus, for example, it becomes possible to a certain extent to span the
temporal gap that lies, in a period of variation in the value of money, between
movements of stock exchange rates and movements of the purchasing power that is
expressed in the prices of commodities.*89

II.11.14

In the same way we can follow statistically the progress of variations in purchasing
power from month to month. The practical utility of all these calculations for
certain purposes is beyond doubt; they have proved their worth in quite recent
events. But we should beware of demanding more from them than they are able to
perform.

CHAPTER 12
The Social Consequences of Variations in the Objective Exchange Value of
Money
1 The Exchange of Present Goods for Future Goods
Variations in the objective exchange value of money evoke displacements in the
distribution of income and property, on the one hand because individuals are apt to
overlook the variability of the value of money, and on the other hand because
variations in the value of money do not affect all economic goods and services
uniformly and simultaneously.

II.12.1

For hundreds, even thousands, of years, people completely failed to see that
variations in the objective exchange value of money could be induced by monetary
factors. They tried to explain all variations of prices exclusively from the
commodity side. It was Bodin's great achievement to make the first attack upon this
assumption, which then quickly disappeared from scientific literature. It long
continued to dominate lay opinion, but nowadays it appears to be badly shaken
even here. Nevertheless, when individuals are exchanging present goods against
future goods they do not take account in their valuations of variations in the
objective exchange value of money. Lenders and borrowers are not in the habit of
allowing for possible future fluctuations in the objective exchange value of money.

II.12.2

Transactions in which present goods are exchanged for future goods also occur
when a future obligation has to be fulfilled, not in money, but in other goods. Still
more frequent are transactions in which the contracts do not have to be fulfilled by
either party until a later point of time. All such transactions involve a risk, and this
fact is well known to all contractors. When anybody buys (or sells) corn, cotton, or
sugar futures, or when anybody enters into a long-term contract for the supply of
coal, iron, or timber, he is well aware of the risks that are involved in the
transaction. He will carefully weigh the chances of future variations in prices, and
often take steps, by means of insurance or hedging transactions such as the
technique of the modern exchange has developed, to reduce the aleatory factor in
his dealings.

II.12.3

In making long-term contracts involving money, the contracting parties are
generally unconscious that they are taking part in a speculative transaction.
Individuals are guided in their dealings by the belief that money is stable in value,
that its objective exchange value is not liable to fluctuations, at least so far as its
monetary determinants are concerned. This is shown most clearly in the attitude
assumed by legal systems with regard to the problem of the objective exchange
value of money.

II.12.4

In law, the objective exchange value of money is stable. It is sometimes asserted
that legal systems adopt the fiction of the stability of the exchange value of money;
but this is not true. In setting up a fiction, the law requires us to take an actual
situation and imagine it to be different from what it really is, either by thinking of
nonexistent elements as added to it or by thinking of existing elements as removed
from it, so as to permit the application of legal maxims which refer only to the
situation as thus transformed. Its purpose in doing this is to make it possible to
decide cases according to analogy when a direct ruling does not apply. The whole
nature of legal fictions is determined by this purpose, and they are sustained only
so far as it requires. The legislator and the judge always remain aware that the
fictitious situation does not correspond to reality. So it is also with the so-called
dogmatic fiction that is employed in jurisprudence to permit legal facts to be

II.12.5

dogmatic fiction that is employed in jurisprudence to permit legal facts to be
systematically classified and related to each other. Here again, the situation is
thought of as existing, but it is not assumed to exist.*90
The attitude of the law to money is quite a different matter. The jurist is totally
unacquainted with the problem of the value of money; he knows nothing of
fluctuations in its exchange value. The naive popular belief in the stability of the
value of money has been admitted, with all its obscurity, into the law, and no great
historical cause of large and sudden variations in the value of money has ever
provided a motive for critical examination of the legal attitude toward the subject.
The system of civil law had already been completed when Bodin set the example of
attempting to trace back variations in the purchasing power of money to causes
exerting their influence from the monetary side. In this matter, the discoveries of
more modern economists have left no trace on the law. For the law, the
invariability of the value of money is not a fiction, but a fact.

II.12.6

All the same, the law does devote its attention to certain incidental questions of the
value of money. It deals thoroughly with the question of how existing legal
obligations and indebtednesses should be reckoned as affected by a transition from
one currency to another. In earlier times, jurisprudence devoted the same attention
to the royal debasement of the coinage as it was later to devote to the problems
raised by the changing policies of states in choosing first between credit money and
metallic money and then between gold and silver. Nevertheless, the treatment that
these questions have received at the hands of the jurists has not resulted in
recognition of the fact that the value of money is subject to continual fluctuation. In
fact, the nature of the problem, and the way in which it was dealt with, made this
impossible from the very beginning. It was treated, not as a question of the attitude
of the law toward variations in the value of money, but as a question of the power
of the prince or state arbitrarily to modify existing obligations and thus to destroy
existing rights. At one time, this gave rise to the question whether the legal validity
of the money was determined by the stamp of the ruler of the country or by the
metal content of the coin; later, to the question whether the command of the law or
the free usage of business was to settle if the money was legal tender or not. The
answer of public opinion, grounded on the principles of private property and the
protection of acquired rights, ran the same in both cases: "Prout quidque
contractum est, ita et solvi debet; ut cum re contraximus, re solvi debet, veluti cum
mutuum dedimus, ut retro pecuniae tantundem solvi debeat."*91 The proviso in this
connection, that nothing was to be regarded as money except what passed for such
at the time when the transaction was entered into and that the debt must be repaid
not merely in the metal but in the currency that was specified in the contract,
followed from the popular view, regarded as the only correct one by all classes of
the community but especially by the tradesmen, that what was essential about a
coin was its metallic content, and that the stamp had no other significance than as
an authoritative certificate of weight and fineness. It occurred to nobody to treat
coins in business transactions any differently from other pieces of metal of the
same weight and fineness. In fact, it is now removed beyond doubt that the
standard was a metallic one.

II.12.7

The view that in the fulfillment of obligations contracted in terms of money the
metallic content alone of the money was to be taken into account prevailed against

II.12.8

and for the attempts, admittedly unsuccessful, to combine the two precious metals
in a uniform monetary system.
Even the coming of credit money, and the problems that it raised, could not direct
the attention of jurisprudence to the question of the value of money. A system of
paper money was thought of as according with the spirit of the law only if the
paper money remained constantly equivalent to the metallic money to which it was
originally equivalent and which it had replaced or if the metal content or metal
value of the claims remained decisive in contracts of indebtedness. But the fact that
the exchange value of even metallic money is liable to variation has continued to
escape explicit legal recognition and public opinion, at least as far as gold is
concerned (and no other metal need nowadays be taken into consideration); there is
not a single legal maxim that takes account of it, although it has been well known
to economists for more than three centuries.

II.12.9

In its naive belief in the stability of the value of money the law is in complete
harmony with public opinion. When any sort of difference arises between law and
opinion, a reaction must necessarily follow; a movement sets in against that part of
the law that is felt to be unjust. Such conflicts always tend to end in a victory of
opinion over the law; ultimately the views of the ruling class become embodie d in
the law. The fact that it is nowhere possible to discover a trace of opposition to the
attitude of the law on this question of the value of money shows clearly that its
provisions relating to this matter cannot possibly be opposed to general opinion.
That is to say, not only the law but public opinion also has never been troubled
with the slightest doubt whatever concerning the stability of the value of money; in
fact, so free has it been from doubts on this score that for an extremely long period
money was regarded as the measure of value. And so when anybody enters into a
credit transaction that s to be fulfilled in money it never occurs to him to take
account of future fluctuations in the purchasing power of money.

II.12.10

Every variation in the exchange ratio between money and other economic goods
shifts the position initially assumed by the parties to credit transactions in terms of
money. An increase in the purchasing power of money is disadvantageous to the
debtor and advantageous to the creditor; a decrease in its purchasing power has the
contrary significance. If the parties to the contract took account of expected
variations in the value of money when they exchanged present goods against future
goods, these consequences would not occur. (But it is true that neither the extent
nor the direction of these variations can be foreseen.)

II.12.11

The variability of the purchasing power of money is only taken into account when
attention is drawn to the problem by the co-existence of two or more sorts of
money whose exchange ratio is liable to big fluctuations. It is generally known that

II.12.12

of it only with regard to certain kinds of money, not with regard to all. Gold, the
principal common medium of exchange nowadays, is thought of as stable in
value.*92
So far as variations in the objective exchange value of money are foreseen, they
influence the terms of credit transactions. If a future fall in the purchasing power of
the monetary unit has to be reckoned with, lenders must be prepared for the fact
that the sum of money which a debtor repays at the conclusion of the transaction
will have a smaller purchasing power than the sum originally lent. Lenders, in fact,
would do better not to lend at all, but to buy other goods with their money. The
contrary is true for debtors. If they buy commodities with the money they have
borrowed and sell them again after a time, they will retain a surplus over and above
the sum that they have to pay back. The credit transaction results in a gain for them.
Consequently it is not difficult to understand that, so long as continued depreciation
is to be reckoned with, those who lend money demand higher rates of interest and
those who borrow money are willing to pay the higher rates. If, on the other hand,
it is expected that the value of money will increase, then the rate of interest will be
lower than it would otherwise have been.*93

II.12.13

Thus if the direction and extent of variations in the exchange value of money could
be foreseen, they would not be able to affect the relations between debtor and
creditor; the coming alterations in purchasing power could be sufficiently allowed
for in the original terms of the credit transaction. *94 But since this assumption, even
so far as fluctuations in credit money or fiat money relatively to gold money are
concerned, never holds good except in a most imperfect manner, the allowance
made in debt contracts for future variations in the value of money is necessarily
inadequate; while even nowadays, after the big and rapid fluctuations in the value
of gold that have occurred since the outbreak of the world war, the great majority
of those concerned in economic life (one might, in fact, say all of them, apart from
the few who are acquainted with theoretical economic s) are completely ignorant of
the fact that the value of gold is variable. The value of gold currencies is still
regarded as stable.

II.12.14

Those economists who have recognized that the value of even the best money is
variable have recommended that in settling the terms of credit transactions, that is
to say, the terms on which present goods are exchanged for future goods, the
medium of exchange should not be one good alone, as is usual nowadays, but a
"bundle" of goods; it is possible in theory if not in practice to include all economic
goods in such a bundle. If this proposal were adopted, money would still be used as
a medium for the exchange of present goods; but in credit transactions the
outstanding obligation would be discharged, not by payment of the nominal sum of
money specified in the contract, but by payment of a sum of money with the
purchasing power that the original sum had at the time when the contract was
made. Thus, if the objective exchange value of money rises during the period of the
contract, a correspondingly smaller sum of money will be payable; if it falls, a
correspondingly larger sum.

II.12.15

The arguments devoted above to the problem of measuring variations in the value
of money show the fundamental inadequacy of these recommendations. If the
prices of the various economic goods are given equal weight in the determination
of the parity coefficients without consideration of their relative quantities, then the
evils for which a remedy is sought may merely be aggravated. If variations in the
prices of such commodities as wheat, rye, cotton, coal, and iron are given the same
significance as variations in the prices of such commodities as pepper, opium,
diamonds, or nickel, then the establishment of the tabular standard would have the
effect of making the content of long-term contracts even more uncertain than at

II.12.16

effect of making the content of long-term contracts even more uncertain than at
present. If what is called a weighted average is used, in which individual
commodities have an effect proportioned to their significance,*95 then the same
consequences will still follow as soon as the conditions of production and
consumption alter. For the subjective values attached by human beings to different
economic goods are just as liable to constant fluctuation as are the conditions of
production; but it is impossible to take account of this fact in determining the parity
coefficients, because these must be invariable in order to permit connection with
the past.
It is probable that the immediate associations of any mention nowadays of the
effects of variations in the value of money on existing debt relations will be in
terms of the results of the monstrous experiments in inflation that have
characterized the recent history of Europe. In all countries, during the latter part of
this period, the jurists have thoroughly discussed the question of whether it would
have been possible or even whether it was still possible, by means of the existing
law, or by creating new laws, to offset the injury done to creditors. In these
discussions it was usually overlooked that the variations in the content of debt
contracts that were consequent upon the depreciation of money were due to the
attitude toward the problem taken by the law itself. It is not as if the legal system
were being invoked to remedy an inconvenience for which it was not responsible. It
was just its own attitude that was felt to be an inconvenience—the circumstance
that the government had brought about depreciation. For the legal maxim by which
an inconvertible banknote is legal tender equally with the gold money that was in
circulation before the outbreak of the war, with which it has nothing in common
but the name mark, is a part of the whole system of legal rules which allow the
state to exploit its power to create new money as a source of income. It can no
more be dissociated from this system than can the laws canceling the obligation of
the banks to convert their notes and obliging them to make loans to the government
by the issue of new notes.

II.12.17

When jurists and businessmen assert that the depredation of money has a very great
influence on all kinds of debt relations, that it makes all kinds of business more
difficult, or even impossible, that it invariably leads to consequences that nobody
desires and that everybody feels to be unjust, we naturally agree with them. In a
social order that is entirely founded on the use of money and in which all
accounting is done in terms of money, the destruction of the monetary system
means nothing less than the destruction of the basis of all exchange. Nevertheless,
this evil cannot be counteracted by ad hoc laws designed to remove the burden of
the depreciation from single persons, or groups of persons, or classes of the
community, and consequently to impose it all the more heavily on others. If we do
not desire the pernicious consequences of depreciation, then we must make up our
minds to oppose the inflationary policy by which the depreciation is created.

II.12.18

It has been proposed that monetary liabilities should be settled in terms of gold and

II.12.19

the national exchequer.)
To do away with the consequences of unlimited inflationary policy one thing only
is necessary—the renunciation of all inflationary measures. The problem which the
proponents of the tabular standard seek to solve by means of a "commodity
currency" supplementing the metallic currency, and which Irving Fisher seeks to
solve by his proposals for stabilizing the purchasing power of money, is a different
one—that of dealing with variations in the value of gold.

II.12.20

2 Economic Calculation and Accountancy
The naive conception of money as stable in value or as a measure of value is also
responsible for economic calculation being carried out in terms of money.

II.12.21

Even in other respects, accountancy is not perfect. The precision of its statements is
only illusory. The valuations of goods and rights with which it deals are always
based on estimates depending on more or less uncertain and unknown factors. So
far as this uncertainty arises from the commodity side of the valuations,
commercial practice, sanctioned by the law, attempts to get over the difficulty by
the exercise of the greatest possible caution. With this purpose it demands
conservative estimates of assets and liberal estimates of liabilities, so that the
merchant may be preserved from self-deceit about the success of his enterprises
and his creditors protected.

II.12.22

But there are also shortcomings in accountancy that are due to the uncertainty in its
valuations that results from the liability to variation of the value of money itself. Of
this, the merchant, the accountant, and the commercial court are alike unsuspicious.
They hold money to be a measure of price and value, and they reckon as freely in
monetary units as in units of length, area, capacity, and weight. And if an
economist happens to draw their attention to the dubious nature of this procedure,
they do not even understand the point of his remarks.*98

II.12.23

This disregard of variations in the value of money in economic calculation falsities
accounts of profit and loss. If the value of money falls, ordinary bookkeeping,
which does not take account of monetary depreciation, shows apparent profits,
because it balances against the sums of money received for sales a cost of
production calculated in money of a higher value, and because it writes off from
book values originally estimated in money of a higher value items of money of a
smaller value. What is thus improperly regarded as profit, instead of as part of
capital, is consumed by the entrepreneur or passed on either to the consumer in the
form of price reductions that would not otherwise have been made or to the laborer
in the form of higher wages, and the government proceeds to tax it as income or
profits. In any case, consumption of capital results from the fact that monetary
depreciation falsities capital accounting. Under certain conditions the consequent
destruction of capital and increase of consumption may be partly counteracted by
the fact that the depreciation also gives rise to genuine profits, those of debtors, for
example, which are not consumed but put into reserves. But this can never more
than partly balance the destruction of capital induced by the depreciation. *99

II.12.24

The consumers of the commodities that are sold too cheaply as a result of the false
reckoning induced by the depreciation need not be inhabitants of the territory in
which the depreciating money is used as the national currency. The price
reductions brought about by currency depreciation encourage export to countries
the value of whose money is either not falling at all or at least falling less rapidly.

II.12.25

unable to compete with the entrepreneur who is prepared to make a quasi-gift of
part of his capital to his customers. In 1920 and 1921, Dutch traders who had sold
commodities to Austria could buy them back again after a while much more
cheaply than they had originally sold them, because the Austrian traders completely
failed to see that they were selling them for less than they had cost.
So long as the true state of the case is not recognized, it is customary to rejoice in a
naive Mercantilistic fashion over the increase of exports and to see in the
depreciation of money a welcome "export premium." But once it is discovered that
the source whence this premium flows is the capital of the community, then the
"selling off" procedure is usually regarded less favorably. Again, in importing
countries the public attitude wavers between indignation against "dumping" and
satisfaction with the favorable conditions of purchase.

II.12.26

Where the currency depreciation is a result of government inflation carried out by
the issue of notes, it is possible to avert its disastrous effect on economic
calculation by conducting all bookkeeping in a stable money instead. But so far as
the depreciation is a depreciation of gold, the world money, there is no such easy
way out.*100

II.12.27

3 Social Consequences of Variations in the Value of Money When Only One
Kind of Money Is Employed
If we disregard the exchange of present goods for future goods, and restrict our
considerations for the time being to those cases in which the only exchanges are
those between present goods and present money, we shall at once observe a
fundamental difference between the effects of an isolated variation in a single
commodity price, emanating solely from the commodity side, and the effects of a
variation in the exchange ratio between money and other economic goods in
general, emanating from the monetary side. Variations in the price of a single
commodity influence the distribution of goods among individuals primarily
because the commodity in question, if it plays a part in exchange transactions at all,
is ex definitione not distributed among individuals in proportion to their demands
for it .There are economic agents who produce it (in the broadest sense of the word,
so as to include dealers) and sell it, and there are economic agents who merely buy
it and consume it. And it is obvious what effects would result from a displacement
of the exchange ratio between this particular good and the other economic goods
(including money); it is clear who would be likely to benefit by them and who to be
injured.

II.12.28

The effects in the case of money are different. As far as money is concerned, all
economic agents are to a certain extent dealers.*101 Every separate economic agent
maintains a stock of money that corresponds to the extent and intensity with which
he is able to express his demand for it in the market. If the objective exchange
value of all the stocks of money in the world could be instantaneously and in equal
proportion increased or decreased, if all at once the money prices of all goods and
services could rise or fall uniformly, the relative wealth of individual economic
agents would not be affected. Subsequent monetary calculation would be in larger
or smaller figures; that is all. The variation in the value of money would have no
other significance than that of a variation of the calendar or of weights and
measures.

II.12.29

The social displacements that occur as consequences of variations in the value of
money result solely from the circumstance that this assumption never holds good.
In the chapter dealing with the determinants of the objective exchange value of
money it was shown that variations in the value of money always start from a given

II.12.30

money it was shown that variations in the value of money always start from a given
point and gradually spread out from this point through the whole community. And
this alone is why such variations have an effect on the social distribution of
income.
It is true that the variations in market exchange ratios that emanate from the
commodity side are also not as a rule completed all at once; they also start at some
particular point and then spread with greater or less rapidity. And because of this,
price variations of this sort too are followed by consequences that are due to the
fact that the variations in prices do not occur all at once but only gradually. But
these are consequences that are encountered in a marked degree by a limited
number of economic agents only namely, those who, as dealers or producers, are
sellers of the commodity in question. And further, this is not the sum of the
consequences of variations in the objective exchange value of a commodity. When
the price of coal falls because production has increased while demand has remained
unaltered, then, for example, those retailers are involved who have taken supplies
from the wholesale dealers at the old higher price but are now able to dispose of
them only at the new and lower price. But this alone will not account for all the
social changes brought about by the increase of production of coal. The increase in
the supply of coal will have improved the economic position of the community.
The fall in the price of coal does not merely amount to a rearrangement of income
and property between producer and consumer; it also expresses an increase in the
national dividend and national wealth. Many have gained what none have lost. The
case of money is different.

II.12.31

The most important of the causes of a diminution in the value of money of which
we have to take account is an increase in the stock of money while the demand for
it remains the same, or tails off, or, if it increases, at least increases less than the
stock. This increase in the stock of money, as we have seen, starts with the original
owners of the additional quantity of money and then transfers itself to those that
deal with these persons, and so forth. A lower subjective valuation of money is
then passed on from person to person because those who come into possession of
an additional quantity of money are inclined to consent to pay higher pr ices than
before. High prices lead to increased production and rising wages, and, because all
of this is generally regarded as a sign of economic prosperity, a fall in the value of
money is, and always has been, considered an extraordinarily effective means of
increasing economic welfare.*102 This is a mistaken view, for an increase in the
quantity of money results in no increase of the stock of consumption goods at
people's disposal. Its effect may well consist in an alteration of the distribution of
economic goods among human beings but in no case, apart from the incidental
circumstance referred to on page 161 above, can it directly increase the total
amount of goods possessed by human beings, or their welfare. It is true that this
result may be brought about indirectly, in the way in which any change in
distribution may affect production as well; that is, by those classes in whose favor
the redistribution occurs using their additional command of money to accumulate
more capital than would have been accumulated by those people from whom the
money was withdrawn. But this does not concern us here. What we are concerned
with is whether the variation in the value of money has any other economic
significance than its effect on distribution. If it. has no other economic significance,
then the increase of prosperity can only be apparent; for it can only benefit a part of
the community at the cost of a corresponding loss by the other part. And thus in
fact the matter is. The cost must be borne by those classes or countries that are the
last to be reached by the fall in the value of money.

II.12.32

Let us, for instance, suppose that a new gold mine is opened in an isolated state.
The supplementary quantity of gold that streams from it into commerce goes at first

II.12.33

The supplementary quantity of gold that streams from it into commerce goes at first
to the owners of the mine and then by turns to those who have dealings with them.
If we schematically divide the whole community into four groups, the mine
owners, the producers of luxury goods, the remaining producers, and the
agriculturalists, the first two groups will be able to enjoy the benefits resulting from
the reduction in the value of money the former of them to a greater extent than the
latter. But even as soon as we reach the third group, the situation is altered. The
profit obtained by this group as a result of the increased demands of the first two
will already be offset to some extent by the rise in the prices of luxury goods which
will have experienced the full effect of the depreciation by the time it begins to
affect other goods. Finally for the fourth group, the whole process will result in
nothing but loss. The farmers will have to pay dearer for all industrial products
before they are compensated by the increased pric es of agricultural products. It is
true that when at last the prices of agricultural products do rise, the period of
economic hardship for the farmers is over; but it will no longer be possible for
them to secure profits that will compensate them for the losses they have suffered.
That is to say, they will not be able to use their increased receipts to purchase
commodities at prices corresponding to the old level of the value of money; for the
increase of prices will already have gone through the whole community. Thus the
losses suffered by the farmers at the time when they still sold their products at the
old low prices but had to pay for the products of others at the new and higher prices
remain uncompensated. It is these losses of the groups that are the last to be
reached by the variation in the value of money which ultimately constitute the
source of the profits made by the mine owners and the groups most closely
connected with them.
There is no difference between the effects on the distribution of income and wealth
that are evoked by the fact that variations in the objective exchange value of money
do not affect different goods and services at the same time and in the same degree,
whether the case is that of metallic money or that of fiat or credit money. When the
increase of money proceeds by way of issue of currency notes or inconvertible
banknotes, at first only certain economic agents benefit and the additional quantity
of money only spreads gradually through the whole community. If, for example,
there is an issue of paper money in time of war, the new notes will first go into the
pockets of the war contractors. "As a result, these persons' demands for certain
articles will increase and so also the price and the sale of these articles, but
especially in so far as they are luxury articles. Thus the position of the producers of
these articles will be improved, their demand for other commodities will also
increase, and thus the increase of prices and sales will go on, distributing itself over
a constantly augmented number of articles, until at last it has reached them all."*103
In this case, as before, there are those who gain by inflation and those who lose by
it. The sooner anybody is in a position to adjust his money income to its new value,
the more favorable will the process be for him. Which persons, groups, and classes
fare better in this, and which worse, depends upon the actual data of each
individual case, without knowledge of which we are not in a position to form a
judgment.

II.12.34

Let us now leave the example of the isolated state and turn our attention to the
international movements that arise from a fall in the value of money due to an
increase in its amount. Here, again, the process is the same. There is no increase in
the available stock of goods; only its distribution is altered. The country in which
the new mines are situated and the countries that deal directly with it have their
position bettered by the fact that they are still able to buy commodities from other
countries at the old lower prices at a time when depreciation at home has already
occurred. Those countries that are the last to be reached by the new stream of

II.12.35

occurred. Those countries that are the last to be reached by the new stream of
money are those which must ultimately bear the cost of the increased welfare of the
other countries. Thus Europe made a bad bargain when the newly discovered gold
fields of America, Australia, and South Africa evoked a tremendous boom in these
countries. Palaces rose over night where there was nothing a few years before but
virgin forest and wilderness; the prairies were intersected with railways; and
anything and everything in the way of luxury goods that could be produced by the
Old World found markets in territories which a little earlier had been populated by
naked nomads and among people who in many cases had previously been without
even the barest necessaries of existence. All of this wealth was imported from the
old industrial countries by the new colonists, the fortunate diggers, and paid for in
gold that was spent as freely as it had been received. It is true that the prices paid
for these commodities were higher than would have corresponded to the earlier
purchasing power of money; nevertheless, they were not so high as to make full
allowance for the changed circumstances. Europe had exported ships and rails,
metal goods and textiles, furniture and machines, for gold which it little needed or
did not need at all, for what it had already was enough for all its monetary
transactions.
A diminution of the value of money brought about by any other kind of cause has
an entirely similar effect. For the economic consequences of variations in the value
of money are determined, not by their causes, but by the nature of their slow
progress, from person to person, from class to class, and from country to country. If
we consider in particular those variations in the value of money which arise from
the action of sellers in increasing prices, as described in the second chapter of this
part, we shall find that the resultant gradual diminution of the value of money
constitutes one of the motives of the groups which apparently dictate the rise of
prices. The groups which begin the rise have it turned to their own disadvantage
when the other groups eventually raise their prices too; but the former groups
receive their higher prices at a time when the prices of the things they buy are still
at the lower level. This constitutes a permanent gain for them. It is balanced by the
losses of those groups who are the last to raise the prices of their goods or services;
for these already have to pay the higher prices at a time when they are still
receiving only the lower prices for what they sell. And when they eventually raise
their prices also, be ing the last to do this they can no longer offset their earlier
losses at the expense of other classes of the community. Wage laborers used to be
in this situation, because as a rule the price of labor did not share in the earlier
stages of upward price movements. Here the entrepreneurs gained what the laborers
lost. For a long time, civil servants were in the same situation. Their multitudinous
complaints were partly based on the fact that, since their money incomes could not
easily be increased, they had largely to bear the cost of the continual rise in prices.
But recently this state of affairs has been changed through the organization of the
civil servants on trade-union lines, which has enabled them to secure a quicker
response to demands for increases of salaries.

II.12.36

The converse of what is true of a depreciation in the value of money holds for an
increase in its value. Monetary appreciation, like monetary depreciation, does not
occur suddenly and uniformly throughout a whole community, but as a rule starts
from single classes and spreads gradually. If this were not the case, and if the
increase in the value of money took place almost simultaneously in the whole
community, then it would not be accompanied by the special kind of economic
consequences that interest us here. Let us assume, for instance, that bankruptcy of
the credit-issuing institutions of a country leads to a panic and that everybody is
ready to sell commodities at any price whatever in order to put himself in
possession of cash, while on the other hand buyers cannot be found except at

II.12.37

possession of cash, while on the other hand buyers cannot be found except at
greatly reduced prices. It is conceivable that the increase in the value of money that
would arise in consequence of such a panic would reach all persons and
commodities uniformly and simultaneously. As a rule, however, an increase in the
value of money spreads only gradually. The first of those who have to con tent
themselves with lower prices than before for the commodities they sell, while they
still have to pay the old higher prices for the commodities they buy, are those who
are injured by the increase in the value of money. Those, however, who are the last
to have to reduce the prices of the commodities they sell, and have meanwhile been
able to take advantage of the fall in the prices of other things, are those who profit
by the change.
4 The Consequences of Variations in the Exchange Ratio Between Two Kinds of
Money
Among the consequences of variations in the value of money it is those of
variations in the exchange ratio between two different kinds of money in which
economic science has been chiefly interested. This interest has been aroused by the
events of monetary history. In the course of the nineteenth century international
trade developed in a hitherto undreamed-of manner, and the economic connections
between countries became extraordinarily close. Now just at this time when
commercial relations were beginning to grow more active, the monetary standards
of the individual states were becoming more diverse. A number of countries went
over for a shorter or longer period to credit money and the others, which were
partly on gold and partly on silver, were soon in difficulties, because the ratio
between the values of these two precious metals, which had changed but slowly
during centuries, suddenly began to exhibit sharp variations. And in recent years
this problem has been given a much greater practical significance still by monetary
happenings in the war and postwar periods.

II.12.38

Let us suppose that one kilogram of silver had been exchangeable for ten quintals
of wheat, and that upon the objective exchange value of silver being halved, owing,
say, to the discovery of new and prolific mines, one kilogram of it was no longer
able to purchase more than five bushels of wheat. From what has been said on the
natural exchange ratio of different kinds of money, it follows that the objective
exchange value of silver in terms of other kinds of money would now also be
halved. If it had previously been possible to purchase one kilogram of gold with
fifteen kilograms of silver, thirty kilograms would now be needed to make the
same purchase; for the objective exchange value of gold in relation to commodities
would have remained unchanged, while that of silver had been halved. Now this
change in the purchasing power of silver over commodities will not occur all at
once, but gradually. A full account has been given of the way in which it will start
from a certain point and gradually spread outward, and of the consequences of this
process. Until now we have investigated these consequences only so far as they
occur within an area with a uniform monetary standard; but now we must trace up
the further consequences involved in commercial relations with areas in which
other sorts of money are employed. One thing that was found to be true of the
former case can be predicated of this also: if the variations in the objective
exchange value of the money occurred uniformly and simultaneously throughout
the whole community then such social consequences could not appear at all. The
fact that these variations always occur one after another is the sole reason for their
remarkable economic effects.

II.12.39

Variations in the objective exchange value of a given kind of money do not affect
the determination of the exchange ratio between this and other kinds of money until
they begin to affect commodities that either are already objects of commercial

II.12.40

they begin to affect commodities that either are already objects of commercial
relations between the two areas or at least are able to become such upon a moderate
change in prices. The point of time at which this situation arises determines the
effects upon the commercial relations of the two areas that will result from
variations in the objective exchange value of money. These vary according as the
prices of the commodities concerned in international trade are adjusted to the new
value of money before or after those of other commodities. Under the modern
organization of the monetary system this adjustment is usually first made on the
stock exchanges. Speculation on the foreign-exchange and security markets
anticipates coming variations in the exchange ratios between the different kinds of
money at a time when the variations in the value of money have by no means
completed their course through the community, perhaps when they have only just
begun it, but in any case before they have reached the commodities that play a
decisive part in foreign trade. He would be a poor speculator who did not grasp the
course of events in time and act accordingly. But as soon as the variation in the
foreign-exchange rate has been brought about, it reacts upon foreign trade in a
peculiar manner until the prices of all goods and services have been adjusted to the
new objective exchange value of money. During this interval the margins between
the different prices and wages constitute a fund that somebody must receive and
somebody surrender. In a word, we are here again confronted with a redistribution,
which is noteworthy in that its influence extends beyond the are where the good
whose objective exchange value is changing is employed as domestic money. It is
clear that this is the only sort of consequence that can follow from variations in the
value of money. The social stock of goods has in no way been increased; the total
quantity that can be distributed has remained the same.
As soon as an uncompleted change in the objective exchange value of any
particular kind if money becomes expressed in the foreign-exchange rates, a new
opportunity of making a profit is opened up, either for exporters or for importers
according as the purchasing power of money is decreasing or increasing. Let us
take the former case, that of the diminution in the value of money. Since, according
to our assumptions, the changes in domestic prices are not yet finished, exporters
derive an advantage from the circumstance that the commodities that they market
already fetch the new higher prices whereas the commodities and services that they
want themselves and, what is of particular importance, the material and personal
factors of production that they employ, are still obtainable at the old lower prices.
Who the "exporter" is who pockets this gain, whether it is the producer or the
dealer, is impertinent to our present inquiry; all that we need to know is that in the
given circumstances transactions will result in profit for some and loss for others.

II.12.41

In any case the exporter shares his profit with the foreign importer and foreign
consumer And it is even possible —this depends upon the organization of the
export trade—that the profits which the exporter retains are only apparent, not real.

II.12.42

Thus the result is always that the gains of foreign buyers, which in certain cases are
shared with home exporters, are counterbalanced by losses that are borne entirely at
home. It is clear that what was said of the promotion of exportation by the
falsification of monetary accounting applies also to the "export premium" arising
from a diminution of the value of money.

CHAPTER 13
Monetary Policy
1 Monetary Policy Defined*104
The economic consequences of fluctuations in the objective exchange value of
money have such important bearings on the life of the community and of the
individual that as soon as the state had abandoned the attempt to exploit for fiscal
ends its authority in monetary matters, and as soon as the large-scale development
of the modern economic community had enabled the state to exert a decisive
influence on the kind of money chosen by the market, it was an obvious step to
think of attaining certain sociopolitical aims by influencing these consequences in a
systematic manner Modern currency policy is something essentially new; it differs
fundamentally from earlier state activity in the monetary sphere. Previously, good
government in monetary matters—from the point of view of the citizen—consisted
in conducting the business of minting so as to furnish commerce with coins which
could be accepted by everybody at their face value; and bad government in
monetary matters—again from the point of view of the citizen—amounted to the
betrayal by the state of the general confidence in it. But when states did debase the
coinage, it was always from purely fiscal motives. The government needed
financial help, that was all; it was not concerned with questions of currency policy.

II.13.1

Questions of currency policy are questions of the objective exchange value of
money. The nature of the monetary system affects a currency policy only insofar as
it involves these particular problems of the value of money; it is only insofar as
they bear upon these questions that the legal and technical characteristics of money
are pertinent. Measures of currency policy are intelligible only in the light of their
intended influence on the objective exchange value of money. They consequently
comprise the antithesis of those acts of economic policy which aim at altering the
money prices of single commodities or groups of commodities.

II.13.2

Not every value problem connected with the objective exchange value of money is
a problem of currency policy. In conflicts of currency policy there are also interests
involved which are not primarily concerned with the alteration of the value of
money for its own sake. In the great struggle that was involved in the
demonetization of silver and the consequent movement of the relative exchange
ratio of the two precious metals gold and silver, the owners of the silver mines and
the other protagonists of the double standard or of the silver standard were not
actuated by the same motives. While the latter wanted a change in the value of
money in order that there might be a general rise in the prices of commodities, the
former merely wished to raise the price of silver as a commodity by securing, or
more correctly regaining, an extensive market for it. Their interests were in no way
different from those of producers of iron or oil in trying to extend the market for
iron or oil so as to increase the profitability of their businesses. It is true that this is
a value problem, but it is a commodity-value problem—that of increasing the
exchange value of the metal silver—and not a problem of the value of money. *105

II.13.3

But although this motive has played a part in currency controversy, it has been a
very subordinate part. Even in the United States, the most important silverproducing area, it has been of significance only inasmuch as the generous practical
encouragement of the silver magnates has been one of the strongest supports of the
bimetallistic agitation. But most of the recruits to the silver camp were attracted,
not by the prospect of an increase in the value of the mines, which was a matter of
indifference to them, but by the hope of a fall in the purchasing power of money,

II.13.4

indifference to them, but by the hope of a fall in the purchasing power of money,
from which they promised themselves miraculous results. If the increase in the
price of silver could have been brought about in any other way than through the
extension of its use as money, say by the creation of a new industrial demand, then
the owners of the mines would have been just as satisfied; but the farmers and
industrialists who advocated a silver currency would not have benefited from it in
any way. And then they would undoubtedly have transferred their allegiance to
other currency policies. Thus, in many states, paper inflationism was advocated,
partly as a forerunner of bimetallism and partly in combination with it.
But even though questions of currency policy are never more than questions of the
value of money, they are sometimes disguised so that their true nature is hidden
from the uninitiated. Public opinion is dominated by erroneous views on the nature
of money and its value, and misunderstood slogans have to take the place of clear
and precise ideas. The fine and complicated mechanism of the money and credit
system is wrapped in obscurity, the proceedings on the stock exchange are a
mystery, the function and significance of the banks elude interpretation. So it is not
surprising that the arguments brought forward in the conflict of the different
interests often missed the point altogether. Counsel was darkened with cryptic
phrases whose meaning was probably hidden even from those who uttered them.
Americans spoke of "the dollar of our fathers" and Austrians of "our dear old
gulden note"; silver, the money of the common man, was set up against gold, the
money of the aristocracy. Many a tribune of the people, in many a passionate dis
course, sounded the loud praises of silver, which, hidden in deep mines, lay
awaiting the time when it should come forth into the light of day to ransom
miserable humanity languishing in its wretchedness. And while some thus regarded
gold as nothing less than the embodiment of the very principle of evil, all the more
enthusiastically did others exalt the glistening yellow metal which alone was
worthy to be the money of rich and mighty nations. It did not seem as if men were
disputing about the distribution of economic goods; rather it was as if the precious
metals were contending among themselves and against paper for the lordship of the
market. All the same, it would be difficult to claim that these Olympic struggles
were engendered by anything but the question of altering the purchasing power of
money.

II.13.5

2 The Instruments of Monetary Policy
The principal instrument of monetary policy at the disposal of the state is the
exploitation of its influence on the choice of the kind of money. It has been shown
above that the position of the state as controller of the mint and as issuer of money
substitutes has allowed it in modern times to exert a decisive influence over
individuals in their choice of the common medium of exchange. If the state uses
this power systematically in order to force the community to accept a particular sort
of money whose employment it desires for reasons of monetary policy then it is
actually carrying through a measure of monetary policy. The states which
completed the transition to a gold standard a generation ago, did so from motives of
monetary policy. They gave up the silver standard or the credit-money standard
because they recognized that the behavior of the value of silver or of credit money
was unsuited to the economic policy they were following. They adopted the gold
standard because they regarded the behavior of the value of gold as relatively the
most suitable for carrying out their monetary policies.

II.13.6

If a country has a metallic standard, then the only measure of currency policy that it
can carry out by itself is to go over to another kind of money. It is otherwise with
credit money and fiat money. Here the state is able to influence the movement of

II.13.7

credit money and fiat money. Here the state is able to influence the movement of
the objective exchange value of money by increasing or decreasing its quantity. It
is true that the means is extremely crude, and that the extent of its consequences
can never be foreseen. But it is easy to apply and popular on account of its drastic
effects.
3 Inflationism
Inflationism is that monetary policy that seeks to increase the quantity of money.

II.13.8

Naive * inflationism demands an increase in the quantity of money without
suspecting that this will diminish the purchasing power of the money. It wants
more money because in its eyes the mere abundance of money is wealth. Fiat
money! Let the state "create" money, and make the poor rich, and free them from
the bonds of the capitalists! How foolish to forgo the opportunity of making
everybody rich, and consequently happy, that the state's right to create money gives
it! How wrong to forgo it simply because this would run counter to the interests of
the rich! How wicked of the economists to assert that it is not within the power of
the state to create wealth by means of the printing press!—You statesmen want to
build railways, and complain of the low state of the exchequer? Well, then, do not
beg loans from the capitalists and anxiously calculate whether your railways will
bring in enough to enable you to pay interest and amortization on your debt.
Create money, and help yourselves. *106

II.13.9

Other inflationists realize very well that an increase in the quantity of money
reduces the purchasing power of the monetary unit. But they endeavor to secure
inflation nonetheless, because of its effect on the value of money; they want
depreciation, because they want to favor debtors at the expense of creditors and
because they want to encourage exportation and make importation difficult. Others,
again, recommend depreciation for the sake of its supposed property of stimulating
production and encouraging the spirit of enterprise.

II.13.10

Depreciation of money can benefit debtors only when it is unforeseen. If
inflationary measures and a reduction of the value of money are expected, then
those who lend money will demand higher interest in order to compensate their
probable loss of capital, and those who seek loans will be prepared to pay the
higher interest because they have a prospect of gaining on capital account. Since, as
we have shown, it is never possible to foresee the extent of monetary depreciation,
creditors in individual cases may suffer losses and debtors make profits, in spite of
the higher interest exacted. Nevertheless, in general it will not be possible for any
inflationary policy, unless it takes effect suddenly and unexpectedly, to alter the
relations between creditor and debtor in favor of the latter by increasing the
quantity of money. *107 Those who lend money will feel obliged, in order to avoid
losses, either to make their loans in a currency that is more stable in value than the
currency of their own country, or to include in the rate of interest they ask, over and
above the compensation that they reckon for the probable depreciation of money
and the loss to be expected on that account, an additional premium for the risk of a
less probable further depreciation. And if those who were seeking credit were
inclined to refuse to pay this additional compensation, the diminution of supply in
the loan market would force them to it. During the inflation after the war it was
seen how savings deposits decreased because savings banks were not inclined to
adjust interest rates to the altered conditions of the variations in the purchasing
power of money.

II.13.11

It has already been shown in the preceding chapter that it is a mistake to think that
the depreciation of money stimulates production. If the particular conditions of a

II.13.12

the depreciation of money stimulates production. If the particular conditions of a
given case of depreciation are such that wealth is transferred to the rich from the
poor, then admittedly saving (and consequently capital accumulation) will be
encouraged, production will consequently be stimulated, and so the welfare of
posterity increased. In earlier epochs of economic history a moderate inflation may
sometimes have had this effect. But the more the development of capitalism has
made money loans (bank and savings-bank deposits and bonds, especially bearer
bonds and mortgage bonds) the most important instruments of saving, the more has
depreciation necessarily imperiled the accumulation of capital, by decreasing the
motive for saving. How the depreciation of money leads to capital consumption
through falsification of economic calculation, and how the appearance of a boom
that it creates is an illusion, and how the depreciation of the money really reacts on
foreign trade have similarly been explained already in the preceding chapter
A third group of inflationists do not deny that inflation involves serious
disadvantages. Nevertheless, they think that there are higher and more important
aims of economic policy than a sound monetary system. They hold that although
inflation may be a great evil, yet it is not the greatest evil, and that the state might
under certain circumstances find itself in a position where it would do well to
oppose greater evils with the lesser evil of inflation. When the defense of the
fatherland against enemies, or the rescue of the hungry from starvation is at stake,
then, it is said, let the currency go to ruin whatever the cost.

II.13.13

Sometimes this sort of conditional inflation is supported by the argument that
inflation is a kind of taxation that is advisable in certain circumstances. Under
some conditions, according to this argument, it is better to meet public expenditure
by a fresh issue of notes than by increasing the burden of taxation or by borrowing.
This was the argument put forward during the war when the expenditure on the
army and navy had to be met; and this was the argument put forward in Germany
and Austria after the war when a part of the population had to be provided with
cheap food, the losses on the operation of the railways and other public
undertakings met, and reparations payments made. The assistance of inflation is
invoked whenever a government is unwilling to increase taxation or unable to raise
a loan; that is the truth of the matter The next step is to inquire why the two usual
methods of raising money for public purposes cannot or will not be employed.

II.13.14

It is only possible to levy high taxes when those who bear the burden of the taxes
assent to the purpose for which the resources so raised are to be expended. It must
be observed here that the greater the total burden of taxation becomes, the harder it
is to deceive public opinion as to the impossibility of placing the whole burden of
taxation upon the small richer class of the community. The taxation of the rich or
of property affects the whole community, and its ultimate consequences for the
poorer classes are often more severe than those of taxation levied throughout the
community. These implications may perhaps be harder to grasp when taxation is
low; but when it is high they can hardly fail to be recognized. There can, moreover,
be no doubt that it is scarcely possible to carry the system of relying chiefly upon
"taxation of ownership" any farther than it has been carried by the inflating
countries, and that the incidence of further taxation could not have been concealed
in the way necessary to guarantee continued popular support.

II.13.15

Who has any doubt that the belligerent peoples of Europe would have tired of war
much more quickly if their governments had clearly and candidly laid before them
at the time the account of their war expenditure? In no European country did the
war party dare to impose taxation on the masses to any considerable extent for
meeting the cost of the war. Even in England, the classical country of "sound
money," the printing presses were set in motion. Inflation had the great advantage

II.13.16

money," the printing presses were set in motion. Inflation had the great advantage
of evoking an appearance of economic prosperity and of increase of wealth, of
falsifying calculations made in terms of money, and so of concealing the
consumption of capital. Inflation gave rise to the pseudo-profits of the entrepreneur
and capitalist which could be treated as income and have specially heavy taxes
imposed upon them without the public at large—or often even the actual taxpayers
themselves—seeing that portions of capital were thus being taxed away. Inflation
made it possible to divert the fury of the people to "speculators" and "profiteers."
Thus it proved itself an excellent psychological resource of the destructive and
annihilist war policy.
What war began, revolution continued. The socialistic or semi-socialistic state
needs money in order to carry on undertakings which do not pay, to support the
unemployed, and to provide the people with cheap food. It also is unable to secure
the necessary resources by means of taxation. It dare not tell the people the truth.
The state-socialist principle of running the railways as a state institution would
soon lose its popularity if it was proposed, say, to levy a specia l tax for covering
their running losses. And the German and Austrian people would have been
quicker in realizing where the resources came from that made bread cheaper if they
themselves had to supply them in the form of a bread tax. In the same way, the
German government that decided for the "policy of fulfillment" in opposition to the
majority of the German people, was unable to provide itself with the necessary
means except by printing notes. And when passive resistance in the Ruhr district
gave rise to a need for enormous sums of money, these, again for political reasons,
were only to be procured with the help of the printing press.

II.13.17

A government always finds itself obliged to resort to inflationary measures when it
cannot negotiate loans and dare not levy taxes, because it has reason to fear that it
will forfeit approval of the policy it is following if it reveals too soon the financial
and general economic consequences of that policy. Thus inflation becomes the
most important psychological resource of any economic policy whose
consequences have to be concealed; and so in this sense it can be called an
instrument of unpopular, that is, of antidemocratic, policy, since by misleading
public opinion it makes possible the continued existence of a system of government
that would have no hope of the consent of the people if the circumstances were
clearly laid before them. That is the political function of inflation. It explains why
inflation has always been an important resource of policies of war and revolution
and why we also find it in the service of socialism. When governments do not think
it necessary to accommodate their expenditure to their revenue and arrogate to
themselves the right of making up the deficit by issuing notes, their ideology is
merely a disguised absolutism.

II.13.18

The various aims pursued by inflationists demand that the inflationary measures
shall be carried through in various special ways. If depreciation is wanted in order
to favor the debtor at the expense of the creditor, then the problem is to strike
unexpectedly at creditor interests. As we have shown, to the extent to which it
could be foreseen, an expected depreciation would be incapable of altering the
relations between creditors and debtors. A policy aiming at a progressive
diminution of the value of money does not benefit debtors.

II.13.19

If, on the other hand, the depreciation is desired in order to "stimulate production"
and to make exportation easier and importation more difficult in relation to other
countries, then it must be borne in mind that the absolute level of the value of
money—its purchasing power in terms of commodities and services and its
exchange ratio against other kinds of money—is without significance for external
(as for internal) trade; the variations in the objective exchange value of money have

II.13.20

(as for internal) trade; the variations in the objective exchange value of money have
an influence on business only so long as they are in progress. The "beneficial
effects" on trade of the depreciation of money only last so long as the depreciation
has not affected all commoditie s and services. Once the adjustment is completed,
then these "beneficial effects" disappear. If it is desired to retain them permanently,
continual resort must be had to fresh diminutions of the purchasing power of
money. It is not enough to reduce the purchasing power of money by one set of
measures only, as is erroneously supposed by numerous inflationist writers; only
the progressive diminution of the value of money could permanently achieve the
aims which they have in view.*108 But a monetary system that corresponds to these
requirements can never be actually realized.
Of course, the real difficulty does not lie in the fact that a progressive diminution of
the value of money must soon reach amounts so small that they would no longer
meet the requirements of commerce. Since the decimal system of calculation is
customary in the majority of present-day monetary systems, even the more stupid
sections of the public would fin d no difficulty in the new reckoning when a system
of higher units was adopted. We could quite easily imagine a monetary system in
which the value of money was constantly falling at the same proportionate rate. Let
us assume that the purchasing power of this money, through variations in the
determinants that lie on the side of money, sinks in the course of a year by onehundredth of its amount at the beginning of the year The levels of the value of the
money at each new year then constitute a diminishing geometrical series. If we put
the value of the money at the beginning of the first year as equivalent to 100, then
the ratio of diminution is equivalent to 0.99, and the value of money at the end of
the nth year is equivalent to 100 × 0.99 . Such a convergent geometrical
progression gives an infinite series, any member of which is always to the next
following member in the ratio of 100 : 99. We could quite easily imagine a
monetary system based on such a principle; perhaps even more easily still if we
increased the ratio, say, to 0.995 or even 0.9975.

II.13.21

But however clearly we may be able to imagine such a monetary system, it
certainly does not lie in our power actually to create one like it. We know the
determinants of the value of money, or think we know them. But we are not in a
position to bend them to our will. For we lack the most important prerequisite for
this; we do not so much as know the quantitative significance of variations in the
quantity of money. We cannot calculate the intensity with which definite
quantitative variations in the ratio of the supply of money and the demand for it
operate upon the subjective valuations of individuals and through these indirectly
upon the market. This remains a matter of very great uncertainty. In employing any
means to influence the value of money we run the risk of giving the wrong dose.
This is all the more important since in fact it is not possible even to measure
variations in the purchasing power of money. Thus even though we can roughly tell
the direction in which we should work in order to obtain the desired variation, we
still have nothing to tell us how far we should go, and we can never find out where
we are already, what effects our intervention has had, or how these are
proportioned to the effects we desire.

II.13.22

Now the danger involved in overdoing an arbitrary influence—a political influence;
that is, one arising from the conscious intervention of human organizations—upon
the value of money must by no means be underestimated, partic ularly in the case of
a diminution of the value of money. Big variations in the value of money give rise
to the danger that commerce will emancipate itself from the money which is
subject to state influence and choose a special money of its own. But without
matters going so far as this it is still possible for all the consequences of variations
in the value of money to be eliminated if the individuals engaged in economic

II.13.23

n-1

in the value of money to be eliminated if the individuals engaged in economic
activity clearly recognize that the purchasing power of money is constantly sinking
and act accordingly. If in all business transactions they allow for what the objective
exchange value of money will probably be in the future, then all the effects on
credit and commerce are finished with. In proportion as the Germans began to
reckon in terms of gold, so was further depreciation rendered incapable of altering
the relationship between creditor and debtor or even of influencing trade. By going
over to reckoning in terms of gold, the community freed itself from the inflationary
policy, and eventually even the government was obliged to acknowledge gold as a
basis of reckoning.
A danger necessarily involved in all attempts to carry out an inflationary policy is
that of excess. Once the principle is admitted that it is possible, permissible, and
desirable, to take measures for "cheapening" money, then immediately the most
violent and bitter controversy will break out as to how far this principle is to be
carried. The interested parties will differ not merely about the steps still to be taken,
but also about the results of the steps that have been taken already. It would be
impossible for any inflationary measures to be taken without violent controversy. It
would be practically impossible so much as to consider counsels of moderation.
And these difficulties arise even in the case of an attempt to secure what the
inflationists call the beneficial effects of a single and isolated depreciation. Even in
the case, say, of assisting "production" or debtors after a serious crisis by a single
depreciation of the value of money, the same problems remain to be solved. They
are difficulties that have to be reckoned with by every policy aiming at a reduction
of the value of money.

II.13.24

Consistently and uninterruptedly continued inflation must eventually lead to
collapse. The purchasing power of money will fall lower and lower, until it
eventually disappears altogether. It is true that an endless process of depreciation
can be imagined. We can imagine the purchasing power of money getting
continually lower without ever disappearing altogether, and prices getting
continually higher without it ever becoming impossible to obtain commodities in
exchange for notes. Eventually this would lead to a situation in which even retail
transactions were in terms of millions and billions and even higher figures; but the
monetary system itself would remain.

II.13.25

But such an imaginary state of affairs is hardly within the bounds of possibility. In
the long run, a money which continually fell in value would have no commercial
utility. It could not be used as a standard of deferred payments. For all transactions
in which com modities or services were not exchanged for cash, another medium
would have to be sought. In fact, a money that is continually depreciating becomes
useless even for cash transactions. Everybody attempts to minimize his cash
reserves, which are a source of continual loss. Incoming money is spent as quickly
as possible, and in the purchases that are made in order to obtain goods with a
stable value in place of the depreciating money even higher prices will be agreed to
than would otherwise be in accordance with market conditions at the time. When
commodities that are not needed at all or at least not at the moment are purchased
in order to avoid the holding of notes, then the process of extrusion of the notes
from use as a general medium of exchange has already begun. It is the beginning of
the "demonetization" of the notes. The process is hastened by its paniclike
character. It may be possible once, twice, perhaps even three or four times, to allay
the fears of the public; but eventually the affair must run its course and then there is
no longer any going back. Once the depreciation is proceeding so rapidly that
sellers have to reckon with considerable losses even if they buy again as quickly as
is possible, then the position of the currency is hopeless.

II.13.26

In all countries where inflation has been rapid, it has been observed that the
decrease in the value of the money has occurred faster than the increase in its
quantity. If m represents the nominal amount of money present in the country
before the beginning of the inflation, P the value of the monetary unit then in terms
of gold, M the nominal amount of money at a given point of time during the
inflation, and p the value in gold of the monetary unit at this point of time; then, as
has often been shown by simple statistical investigations, mP > Mp. It has been
attempted to prove from this that the money has depreciated "too rapidly" and that
the level of the rate of exchange is not "justified." Many have drawn from it the
conclusion that the quantity theory is obviously not true and that depreciation of
money cannot be a result of an increase in its quantity. Others have conceded the
truth of the quantity theory in its primitive form and argued the permissibility or
even the necessity of continuing to increase the quantity of money in the country
until its total gold value is restored to the level at which it stood before the
beginning of the inflation, that is, until Mp = mP.

II.13.27

The error that is concealed in all of this is not difficult to discover. We may
completely ignore the fact already referred to that the exchange rates (including the
bullion rate) move in advance of the purchasing power of the money unit as
expressed in the prices of commodities, so that the gold value must not be taken as
a basis of operations, but purchasing power in terms of commodities, which as a
rule will not have decreased to the same extent as the gold value. For this form of
calculation too, in which P and p do not represent value in terms of gold but
purchasing power in terms of commodities, would still as a rule give the result mP
> Mp. But it must be observed that as the depreciation of money proceeds, the
demand for money (that is, for the kind of money in question) gradually begins to
fall. When loss of wealth is suffered in proportion to the length of time money is
kept on hand, endeavors are made to reduce cash holdings as much as possible.
Now if every individual, even if his circumstances are otherwise unchanged, no
longer wishes to maintain his cash holding at the same level as before the
beginning of the inflation, the demand for money in the whole community, which
can only be the sum of the individuals' demands, decreases too. There is also the
additional fact that as commerce gradually begins to use foreign money and actual
gold in place of notes, individuals begin to hold part of their reserves in foreign
money and in gold and no longer in notes.

II.13.28

An expected fall in the value of money is anticipated by speculation so that the
money has a lower value in the present than would correspond to the relationship
between the immediate supply of it and demand for it. Prices are asked and given
that are not related to the present amount of money in circulation nor to present
demands for money, but to future circumstances. The panic prices paid when the
shops are crowded with buyers anxious to pick up something or other while they
can, and the panic rates reached on the exchange when foreign currencies and
securities that do not represent a claim to fixed sums of money rise precipitously,
anticipate the march of events. But there is not enough money available to pay the
prices that correspond to the presumable future supply of money and demand for it.
And so it comes about that commerce suffers from a shortage of notes, that there
are not enough notes on hand for fulfilling commitments that have been entered
into. The mechanism of the market that adjusts the total demand and the total
supply to each other by altering the exchange ratio no longer functions as far as the
exchange ratio between money and other economic goods is concerned. Business
suffers sensibly from a shortage of notes. This bad state of affairs, once matters
have gone as far as this, can in no way be helped. Still further to increase the note
issue (as many recommend) would only make matters worse. For, since this would
accelerate the growth of the panic, it would also accentuate the maladjustment

II.13.29

accelerate the growth of the panic, it would also accentuate the maladjustment
between depredation and circulation. Shortage of notes for transacting business is a
symptom of an advanced stage of inflation; it is the reverse aspect of panic
purchases and panic prices, the reflection of the "bullishness" of the public that will
finally lead to catastrophe.
The emancipation of commerce from a money which is proving more and more
useless in this way begins with the expulsion of the money from hoards. People
begin at first to hoard other money instead so as to have marketable goods at their
disposal for unforeseen future needs—perhaps precious-metal money and foreign
notes, and sometimes also domestic notes of other kinds which have a higher value
because they cannot be increased by the state (for example, the Romanoff ruble in
Russia or the "blue" money of com munist Hungary); then ingots, precious stones,
and pearls; even pictures, other objects of art, and postage stamps. A further step is
the adoption of foreign currency or metallic money (that is, for all practical
purposes, gold) in credit transactions. Finally, when the domestic currency ceases
to be used in retail trade, wages as well have to be paid in some other way than in
pieces of paper which are then no longer good for anything.

II.13.30

The collapse of an inflation policy carried to its extreme—as in the United States in
1781 and in France in 1796—does not destroy the monetary system, but only the
credit money or fiat money of the state that has overestimated the effectiveness of
its own policy. The collapse emancipates commerce from etatism and establishes
metallic money again.

II.13.31

It is not the business of science to criticize the political aims of inflationism.
Whether the favoring of the debtor at the expense of the creditor, whether the
facilitation of exports and the hindrance of imports, whether the stimulation of
production by transferring wealth and income to the entrepreneur, are to be
recommended or not, are questions which economics cannot answer. With the
instruments of monetary theory alone, these questions cannot even be elucidated as
far as is possible with other parts of the apparatus of economics. But there are
nevertheless three conclusions that seem to follow from our critical examination of
the possibilities of inflationary policy.

II.13.32

In the first place, all the aims of inflationism can be secured by other sorts of
intervention in economic affairs, and secured better, and without undesirable
incidental effects. If it is desired to relieve debtors, moratoria may be declared or
the obligation to repay loans may be removed altogether; if it is desired to
encourage exportation, export premiums may be granted; if it is desired to render
importation more difficult, simple prohibition may be resorted to, or import duties
levied. All these measures permit discrimination between classes of people,
branches of production, and districts, and this is impossible for an inflationary
policy. Inflation benefits all debtors, including the rich, and injures all creditors,
including the poor; adjustment of the burden of debts by special legislation allows
of differentiation. Inflation encourages the exportation of all commodities and
hinders all importation; premiums, duties, and prohibitions can be employed
discriminatingly.

II.13.33

Second, there is no kind of inflationary policy the extent of whose effects can be
foreseen. And finally, continued inflation must lead to a collapse.

II.13.34

Thus we see that, considered purely as a political instrument, inflationism is
inadequate. It is, technically regarded, bad policy, because it is incapable of fully
attaining its goal and because it leads to consequences that are not, or at least are
not always, part of its aim. The favor it enjoys is due solely to the circumstance that

II.13.35

not always, part of its aim. The favor it enjoys is due solely to the circumstance that
it is a policy concerning whose aims and intentions public opinion can be longest
deceived. Its popularity, in fact, is rooted in the difficulty of fully understanding its
consequences.
4 Restrictionism or Deflationism
That policy whic h aims at raising the objective exchange value of money is called,
after the most important means at its disposal, restrictionism or deflationism. This
nomenclature does not really embrace all the policies that aim at an increase in the
value of money. The aim of restrictionism may also be attained by not increasing
the quantity of money when the demand for it increases, or by not increasing it
enough. This method has quite often been adopted as a way of increasing the value
of money in face of the problems of a depreciated credit-money standard; further
increase of the quantity of money has been stopped, and the policy has been to wait
for the effects on the value of money of an increasing demand for it. In the
following discussion, following a widespread custom, we shall use the terms
restrictionism and deflationism to refer to all policies directed to raising the value
of money.

II.13.36

The existence and popularity of inflationism is due to the circumstance that it taps
new sources of public revenue. Governments had inflated from fiscal motives long
before it occurred to anybody to justify their procedure from the point of view of
monetary policy. Inflationistic arguments have always been well supported by the
fact that inflationary measures not only do not impose any burden on the national
exchequer, but actually bring resources to it. Looked at from the fiscal point of
view, inflationism is not merely the cheapest economic policy; it is also at the same
time a particularly good remedy for a low state of the public finances.
Restrictionism, however, demands positive sacrifices from the national exchequer
when it is carried out by the withdrawal of notes from circulation (say through the
issue of interest-bearing bonds or through taxation) and their cancellation; and at
the least it demands from it a renunciation of potential income by forbidding the
issue of notes at a time when the demand for money is increasing. This alone
would suffice to explain why restrictionism has never been able to compete with
inflationism.

II.13.37

Nevertheless, the unpopularity of restrictionism has other causes as well. Attempts
to raise the objective exchange value of money, in the circumstances that have
existed, have necessarily been limited either to single states or to a few states and at
the best have had only a very small prospect of simultaneous realization throughout
the whole world. Now as soon as a single country or a few countries go over to a
money with a rising purchasing power, while the other countries retain a money
with a falling or stationary exchange value, or one which although it may be rising
in value is not rising to the same extent, then, as has been demonstrated above, the
conditions of international trade are modified. In the country whose money is rising
in value, exportation becomes more difficult and importation easier. But the
increased difficulty of exportation and the increased facility of importation, in brief
the deterioration of the balance of trade, have usually been regarded as an
unfavorable situation and consequently been avoided. This alone would provide an
adequate explanation of the unpopularity of measures intended to raise the
purchasing power of money.

II.13.38

But furthermore, quite apart from any consideration of foreign trade, an increase in
the value of money has not been to the advantage of the ruling classes. Those who
get an immediate benefit from such an increase are all those who are entitled to
receive fixed sums of money. Creditors gain at the expense of debtors. Taxation, it

II.13.39

receive fixed sums of money. Creditors gain at the expense of debtors. Taxation, it
is true, becomes more burdensome as the value of money rises; but the greater part
of the advantage of this is secured, not by the state, but by its creditors. Now
policies favoring creditors at the expense of debtors have never been popular.
Lenders of money have been held in odium, at all times and among all peoples.*109
Generally speaking, the class of persons who draw their income exclusively or
largely from the interest on capital lent to others has not been particularly
numerous or influential at any time in any country. A not insignificant part of the
total income from the lending of capital is received by persons whose incomes
chiefly arise from other sources, and in whose budgets it plays only a subordinate
part. This is the case, for instance, not only of the laborers, peasants, small
industrialists, and civil servants, who possess savings that are invested in savings
deposits or in bonds, but also of the numerous big industrialists, wholesalers, or
shareholders, who also own large amounts of bonds. The interests of all of these as
lenders of money are subordinate to their interests as landowners, merchants,
manufacturers, or employees. No wonder, then, that they are not very enthusiastic
about attempts to raise the level of interest.*110

II.13.40

Restrictionistic ideas have never met with any measure of popular sympathy except
after a time of monetary depreciation when it has been necessary to decide what
should take the place of the abandoned inflationary policy. They have hardly ever
been seriously entertained except as part of the alternative: "Stabilization of money
at the present value or revaluation at the level that it had before the inflation."

II.13.41

When the question arises in this form, the reasons that are given for the restoration
of the old metal parity start from the assumption that notes are essentially promises
to pay so much metallic money. Credit money has always originated in a
suspension of the convertibility into cash of Treasury notes or banknotes
(sometimes the suspension was even extended to token coins or to bank deposits)
that were previously convertible at any time on the demand of the bearer and were
already in circulation. Now whether the original obligation of immediate
conversion was expressly laid down by the law or merely founded on custom, the
suspension of conversion has always taken on the appearance of a breach of the law
that could perhaps be excused, but not justified; for the coins or notes that became
credit money through the suspension of cash payment could never have been put
into circulation otherwise than as money substitutes, as secure claims to a sum of
commodity money payable on demand. Consequently, the suspension of immediate
convertibility has always been decreed as a merely temporary measure, and a
prospect held out of its future rescission. But if credit money is thought of only as a
promise to pay, "devaluation" cannot be regarded as anything but a breach of the
law, or as meaning anything less than national bankruptcy.

II.13.42

Yet credit money is not merely an acknowledgment of indebtedness and a promise
to pay. As money, it has a different standing in the transactions of the market. It is
true that it could not have become a money-substitute unless it had constituted a
claim. Nevertheless, at the moment when it became actual money—credit money—
(even if through a breach of the law), it ceased to be valued with regard to the more
or less uncertain prospect of its future full conversion and began to be valued for
the sake of the monetary function that it performed. Its far lower value as an
uncertain claim to a future cash payment has no significance so long as its higher
value as a common medium of exchange is taken into account.

II.13.43

It is therefore quite beside the point to interpret devaluation as national bankruptcy.
The stabilization of the value of money at its present—lower—level is, even when
regarded merely with a view to its effects on existing debt relations, something

II.13.44

regarded merely with a view to its effects on existing debt relations, something
other than this; it is both more and less than national bankruptcy. It is more, for it
affects not merely public debts, but also all private debts; it is less, for one thing
because it also affects those claims of the state that are in terms of credit money
while not affecting such of its obligations as are in terms of cash (metallic money)
or foreign currency, and for another thing because it involves no modification of
the relations of the parties to any contract of indebtedness in terms of credit money
made at a time when the currency stood at a low level, without the parties having
reckoned on an increase of the value of money. When the va lue of money is
increased, then those are enriched who at the time possess credit money or claims
to credit money. Their enrichment must be paid for by debtors, among them the
state (that is, the taxpayers). Yet those who are enriched by the increase in the
value of money are not the same as those who were injured by the depreciation of
money in the course of the inflation; and those who must bear the cost of the policy
of raising the value of money are not the same as those who benefited by its
depreciatio n. To carry out a deflationary policy is not to do away with the
consequences of inflation. You cannot make good an old breach of the law by
committing a new one. And as far as debtors are concerned, restriction is a breach
of the law.
If it is desired to make good the injury which has been suffered by creditors during
the inflation, this can certainly not be done by restriction. In the simpler
circumstances of an undeveloped credit system, the attempt has been made to find a
way out of the difficulty by conversion of the debts contracted before and during
the period of inflation, every debt being recalculated in the devaluated money
according to the value of the credit money in terms of metallic money on the day of
origin. Supposing, for instance, that the metallic money had been depreciated to
one-fifth of its former value, a borrower of 100 gulden before the inflation would
have to pay back after the stabilization, not 100 gulden, but 500, together with
interest on the 500; and a borrower of 100 gulden at a time when the credit money
had already sunk to half of its nominal value, would have to pay interest on and pay
back 250 gulden. *111 This, however, only covers debt obligations which are still
current; the debts which have already been settled in the depreciated money are not
affected. No notice is taken of sales and purchases of bonds and other claims to
fixed sums of money; and, in an age of bearer bonds, this is a quite particularly
serious shortcoming. Finally, this sort of regulation is inapplicable to currentaccount transactions.

II.13.45

It is not our business here to discuss whether something better than this could have
been thought of. In fact, if it is possible to make any sort of reparation of the
damage suffered by creditors at all, it must clearly be sought by way of some such
methods of recalculation. But in any case, increasing the purchasing power of
money is not a suitable means to this end.

II.13.46

Considerations of credit policy also are adduced in favor of increasing the value of
money to the metal parity that prevailed before the beginning of the period of
inflation. A country that has injured its creditors through depreciation brought
about by inflation, it is said, cannot restore the shattered confidence in its credit
otherwise than by a return to the old level of prices. In this way alone can those
from whom it wishes to obtain new loans be satisfied as to the future security of
their claims; the bondholders will be able to assume that any possible fresh
inflation would not ultimately reduce their claims, because after the inflation was
over the original metal parity would presumably be returned to. This argument has

II.13.47

availed themselves of the English banking system, it is said, ought to be satisfied as
to the future security of the English deposits, in order that the English banking
business should not be diminished by mistrust in the future of the English currency.
As always in the case of considerations of credit policy like this, a good deal of
rather dubious psychology is assumed in this argument. It may be there are more
effectual ways of restoring confidence in the future than by measures that do not
benefit some of the injured creditors at all—those who have already disposed of
their claims—and do benefit many creditors who have not suffered any injury—
those who acquired their claims after the depreciation began.
In general, therefore, it is impossible to regard as decisive the reasons that are given
in favor of restoring the value of money at the level that it had before the
commencement of the inflationary policy, especially as consideration of the way in
which trade is affected by a rise in the value of money suggests a need for caution.
Only where and so far as prices are not yet completely adjusted to the relationship
between the stock of money and the demand for it which has resulted from the
increase in the quantity of money, is it possible to proceed to a restoration of the
old parity without encountering a too violent opposition.

II.13.48

5 Invariability of the Objective Exchange Value of Money as the Aim of
Monetary Policy
Thus, endeavors to increase or decrease the objective exchange value of money
prove impracticable. A rise in the value of money leads to consequences which as a
rule seem to be desired by only a small section of the community; a policy with this
aim is contrary to interests which are too great for it to be able to hold its own
against them in the long run. The kinds of intervention which aim at decreasing the
value of money seem more popular; but their goal can be more easily and more
satisfactorily reached in other ways, while their execution meets with quite
insuperable difficulties.

II.13.49

Thus nothing remains but to reject both the augmentation and the diminution of the
objective exchange value of money. This suggests the ideal of a money with an
invariable exchange value, so far as the monetary influences on its value are
concerned. But, this is the ideal money of enlightened statesmen and economists,
not that of the multitude. The latter thinks in far too confused a manner to be able
to grasp the problems here involved. (It must be confessed that they are the most
difficult in economics.) For most people (so far as they do not incline to
inflationistic ideas), that money seems to be the best whose objective exchange
value is not subject to any variation at all, whether originating on the monetary side
or on the commodity side.

II.13.50

The ideal of a money with an exchange value that is not subject to variations due to
changes in the ratio between the supply of money and the need for it—that is, a
money with an invariable innere objektive Tauschwert*113—demands the
intervention of a regulating authority in the determination of the value of money;
and its continued intervention. But here immediately most serious doubts arise
from the circumstance, already referred to, that we have no useful knowledge of the
quantitative significance of given measures intended to influence the value of
money. More serious still is the circumstance that we are by no means in a position

II.13.51

road to it are obscured by a darkness that human knowledge will never be able to
penetrate. But the uncertainty that would exist as to whether there was any need for
intervention to maintain the stability of the exchange value of money, and as to the
necessary extent of such intervention, would inevitably give full license again to
the conflicting interests of the inflationists and restrictionists. Once the principle is
so much as admitted that the state may and should influence the value of money,
even if it were only to guarantee the stability of its value, the danger of mistakes
and excesses immediately arises again.
These possibilities, and the remembrance of very recent experiments in public
finance and inflation, have subordinated the unrealizable ideal of a money with an
invariable exchange value to the demand that the state should at least refrain from
exerting any sort of influence on the value of money. A metallic money, the
augmentation or diminution of the quantity of metal available for which is
independent of deliberate human intervention, is becoming the modern monetary
ideal.

II.13.52

The significance of adherence to a metallic -money system lie s in the freedom of
the value of money from state influence that such a system guarantees. Beyond
doubt, considerable disadvantages are involved in the fact that not only fluctuations
in the ratio of the supply of money and the demand for it, but also fluctuations in
the conditions of production of the metal and variations in the industrial demand
for it, exert an influence on the determination of the value of money. It is true that
these effects, in the case of gold (and even in the case of silver), are not
immoderately great, and these are the only two monetary metals that need be
considered in modern times. But even if the effects were greater, such a money
would still deserve preference over one subject to state intervention, since the latter
sort of money would be subject to still greater fluctuations.

II.13.53

6 The Limits of Monetary Policy
The results of our investigation into the development and significance of monetary
policy should not surprise us. That the state, after having for a period used the
power which it nowadays has of influencing to some extent the determination of
the objective exchange value of money in order to affect the distribution of income,
should have to abandon its further exercise, will not appear strange to those who
have a proper appreciation of the economic function of the state in that social order
which rests upon private property in the means of production. The state does not
govern the market; in the market in which products are exchanged it may quite
possibly be a powerful party, but nevertheless it is only one party of many, nothing
more than that. All its attempts to transform the exchange ratios between economic
goods that are determined in the market can only be undertaken with the
instruments of the market. It can never foresee exactly what the result of any
particular intervention will be. It cannot bring about a desired result in the degree
that it wishes, because the means that the influencing of demand and supply place
at its disposal only affect the pricing process through the medium of the subjective
valuations of individuals; but no judgment as to the intensity of the resulting
transformation of these valuations can be made except when the intervention is a
small one, limited to one or a few groups of commodities of lesser importance, and
even in such a case only approximately. All monetary policies encounter the
difficulty that the effects of any measures taken in order to influence the
fluctuations of the objective exchange value of money can neither be foreseen in
advance, nor their nature and magnitude be determined even after they have
already occurred.

II.13.54

Now the renunciation of intervention on grounds of monetary policy that is
involved in the retention of a metallic commodity currency is not complete. In the
regulation of the issue of fiduciary media there is still another possibility of
influencing the objective exchange value of money. The problem that this gives
rise to must be investigated (in the following part) before we can discuss certain
plans that have recently been announced for the establishment of a monetary
system under which the value of money would be more stable than that of a gold
currency.

II.13.55

7 Excursus: The Concepts Inflation and Deflation
Observant readers may perhaps be struck by the fact that in this book no precise
definition is given of the terms inflation and deflation (or restriction or
contraction); that they are in fact hardly employed at all, and then only in places
where nothing in particular depends upon their precision. Only inflationism and
deflationism (or restrictionism) are spoken of, and an exact definition is given of
the concepts implied by these expressions.*114 Obviously this procedure demands
special justification.

II.13.56

I am by no means in agreement with those unusually influential voices that have
been raised against the employment of the expression inflation altogether.*115 But I
do think that it is an expression that it is possible to do without, and that it would be
highly dangerous, on account of a serious difference between its meaning in the
pure economic theory of money and banking and its meaning in everyday
discussions of currency policy, to make use of it where a sharp scientific precision
of the words employed is desirable.

II.13.57

In theoretical investigation there is only one meaning that can rationally be attached
to the expression inflation: an increase in the quantity of money (in the broader
sense of the term, so as to include fiduciary media as well), that is not offset by a
corresponding increase in the need for money (again in the broader sense of the
term), so that a fall in the objective exchange value of money must occur Again,
deflation (or restriction, or contraction) signifies a diminution of the quantity of
money (in the broader sense) which is not offset by a corresponding diminution of
the demand for money (in the broader sense), so that an increase in the objective
exchange value of money must occur If we so define these concepts, it follows that
either inflation or deflation is constantly going on, for a situation in which the
objective exchange value of money did not alter could hardly ever exist for very
long. The theoretical value of our definition is not in the least reduced by the fact
that we are not able to measure the fluctuations in the objective exchange value of
money, or even by the fact that we are not able to discern them at all except when
they are large.

II.13.58

If the variations in the objective exchange value of money that result from these
causes are so great that they can no longer remain unobserved, it is usual in
discussions of economic policy to speak of inflation and deflation (or restriction, or
contraction). Now in these discussions, whose practical significance is
extraordinarily great, it would be very little to the purpose to use those precise
concepts which alone come up to a strictly scientific standard. It would be
ridiculous pedantry to attempt to provide an economist's contribution to the
controversy as to whether in this or the other country inflation has occurred since
1914 by saying: "Excuse me, there has probably been inflation throughout the
whole world since 1896, although on a small scale." In politics, the question of
degree is sometimes the whole point, not, as in theory, the question of principle.

II.13.59

But once the economist has acknowledged that it is not entirely nonsensical to use
the expressions inflation and deflation to indicate such variations in the quantity of
money as evoke big changes in the objective exchange value of money, he must
renounce the employment of these expressions in pure theory. For the point at
which a change in the exchange ratio begins to deserve to be called big is a
question for political judgment, not for scientific investigation.

II.13.60

It is incontrovertible that ideas are bound up with the popular usage of the terms
inflation and deflation that must be combated as altogether inappropriate when they
creep into economic investigation. In everyday usage, these expressions are based
upon an entirely untenable idea of the stability of the value of money, and often
also on conceptions that ascribe to a monetary system in which the quantity of
money increases and decreases pari passu with the increase and decrease of the
quantity of commodities the property of maintaining the value of money stable. Yet
however worthy of condemnation this mistake may be, it cannot be denied that the
first concern of those who wish to combat popular errors with regard to the causes
of the recent tremendous variations in prices should not so much be the
dissemination of correct views on the problems of the nature of money in general,
as the contradiction of those fundamental errors which, if they continue to be
believed, must lead to catastrophic consequences. Those who in the years 1914-24
contested the balance-of-payments theory in Germany in order to oppose the
continuation of the policy of inflation may claim the indulgence of their
contemporaries and successors if they were not always quite strictly scientific in
their use of the word inflation. In fact, it is this very indulgence that we are bound
to exercise toward the pamphlets and articles dealing with monetary problems that
obliges us to refrain from using these misleading expressions in scientific
discussion.

II.13.61

CHAPTER 14
The Monetary Policy of Etatism
1 The Monetary Theory of Etatism
Etatism, as a theory, is the doctrine of the omnipotence of the Estate, and, as a
policy, the attempt to regulate all mundane affairs by authoritative commandment
and prohibition. The ideal society of etatism is a particular sort of socialistic
community; it is usual in discussions involving this ideal society to speak of state
socialism, or, in some connections, of Christian socialism. Superficially regarded,
the etatistic ideal society does not differ very greatly from the outward form
assumed by the capitalistic organization of society. Etatism by no means aims at
the formal transformation of all ownership of the means of production into state
ownership by a complete overthrow of the established legal system. Only the
biggest industrial, mining, and transport enterprises are to be nationalized; in
agriculture, and in medium- and small-scale industry, private property is nominally
to continue. Nevertheless, all enterprises are to become state undertakings in fact.
Owners are to be left the title and dignity of ownership, it is true, and to be given a
right to the receipt of a "reasonable" income, "in accordance with their position";
but, in fact, every business is to be changed into a government office and every
livelihood into an official profession. There is no room at all for independent
enterprise under any variety of state socialism. Prices are to be regulated
authoritatively; authority is to fix what is to be produced, and how, and in what
quantities. There is to be no speculation, no "excessive" profit, no loss. There is to
be no innovation unless it be decreed by authority. The official is to direct and
supervise everything. *116

II.14.1

It is one of the peculiarities of etatism that it is unable to conceive of human beings
living together in society otherwise than in accordance with its own particular
socialistic ideal. The superficial similarity that exists between the socialist state that
is its ideal and pattern and the social order based upon private property in the
means of production causes it to overlook the fundamental differences that separate
the two. Everything that contradicts the assumption that the two kinds of social
order are similar is regarded by the etatist as a transient anomaly and a culpable
transgression of authoritative decrees, as evidence that the state has let slip the reins
of government and only needs to take them more firmly in hand for everything to
be beautifully in order again. That the social life of human beings is subject to
definite limitations; that it is governed by a set of laws that are comparable with
those of Nature; these are notions that are unknown to the etatist. For the etatist,
everything is a question of Macht—power, force, might. And his conception of
Macht is crudely materialistic.

II.14.2

Every word of etatistic thought is contradicted by the doctrines of sociology and
economics; this is why etatists endeavor to prove that these sciences do not exist. In
their opinion, social affairs are shaped by the state. To the law, all things are
possible; and there is no sphere in which state intervention is not omnipotent.

II.14.3

For a long time the modern etatists shrank from an explicit application of their
principles to the theory of money. It is true that some, Adolf Wagner and Lexis in
particular, expressed views on the domestic and foreign value of money and on the
influence of the balance of payments on the condition of the exchanges that
contained all the elements of an etatistic theory of money; but always with great
caution and reserve. The first to attempt an explicit application of etatistic
principles in the sphere of monetary doctrine, was Knapp.

II.14.4

The policy of etatism had its heyday during the period of the world war, which
itself was the inevitable consequence of the dominance of etatistic ideology. In the
"war economy" the postulates of etatism were realized. *117 The war economy and
the transition economy showed what etatism is worth and what the policy of
etatism is able to achieve.

II.14.5

An examination of etatistic monetary doctrine and monetary policy has a
significance that is not limited to the history of ideas. For in spite of all its ill
success, etatism is still the ruling doctrine, at least on the continent of Europe. It is,
at any rate, the doctrine of the rulers; its ideas prevail in monetary policy. However
convinced we may be that it is scientifically valueless, it will not do for us
nowadays to ignore it.*118

II.14.6

2 National Prestige and the Rate of Exchange
For the etatist, money is a creature of the state, and the esteem in which money is
held is the economic expression of the respect or prestige enjoyed by the state. The
more powerful and the richer the state, the better its money. Thus, during the war, it
was asserted that "the monetary standard of the vic tors" would ultimately be the
best money. Yet victory and defeat on the battlefield can exercise only an indirect
influence on the value of money. Generally speaking, a victorious state is more
likely than a conquered one to be able to renounce the aid of the printing press, for
it is likely to find it easier to limit its expenditure on the one hand and to obtain
credit on the other hand. But the same considerations suggest that increasing
prospects of peace will lead to a more favorable estimation of the currency even of
the defeated country. In October 1918 the mark and the krone rose; it was believed
that even in Germany and Austria a cessation of inflation might be counted upon—
an expectation which admittedly was not fulfilled.

II.14.7

History likewise shows that sometimes the "monetary standard of the victors" can
prove to be very bad. There have seldom been more brilliant victories than those
eventually achieved by the American insurgents under Washington against the
English troops. But the American "continental" dollar did not benefit from them.
The more proudly the star-spangled banner rose on high, the lower did the
exchange rate fall, until, at the very moment when the victory of the rebels was
secured, the dollar became entirely valueless. The course of events was no different
not long afterward in France. In spite of the victories of the revolutionary army, the
metal premium rose continually, until at last in 1796 the value of money touched
zero point. In both cases the victorious state had carried inflation to its extreme.

II.14.8

Neither has the wealth of a country any bearing on the valuation of its money.
Nothing is more erroneous than the widespread habit of regarding the monetary
standard as something in the nature of the shares of the state or the community.
When the German mark was quoted at ten centimes in Zurich, bankers said: "Now
is the time to buy marks. The German community is indeed poorer nowadays than
before the war, so that a low valuation of the mark is justified. Neverthele ss, the
wealth of Germany is certainly not reduced to a twelfth of what it was before the
war; so the mark is bound to rise." And when the Polish mark had sunk to five

II.14.9

war; so the mark is bound to rise." And when the Polish mark had sunk to five
centimes in Zurich, other bankers said: "This low level is inexplicable. Poland is a
rich country; it has a flourishing agriculture, it has wood, coal and oil; so its rate of
exchange ought to be incomparably higher."*119 Such observers fail to recognize that
the valuation of the monetary unit depends not upon the wealth of the country, but
upon the ratio between the quantity of money and the demand for it, so that even
the richest country may have a bad currency and the poorest country a good one.
3 The Regulation of Prices by Authoritative Decree
The oldest and most popular instrument of etatistic monetary policy is the official
fixing of maximum prices. High prices, thinks the etatist, are not a consequence of
an increase in the quantity of money but a consequence of reprehensible activity on
the part of "bulls" and "profiteers"; it will suffice to suppress their machinations in
order to ensure the cessation of the rise of prices. Thus it is made a punishable
offense to demand, or even to pay; "excessive" prices.

II.14.10

Like most other governments, the Austrian government during the war began this
kind of criminal-law contest with price raising on the same day that it put the
printing press in motion in the service of the national finances. Let us suppose that
it had at first been successful in this. Let us completely disregard the fact that the
war had also diminished the supply of commodities, and suppose that there had
been no forces at work on the commodity side to alter the exchange ratio between
commodities and money. We must further disregard the fact that the war, by
increasing the period of time necessary for transporting money, and by limiting the
operation of the clearing system, and also in other ways, had increased the demand
for money of individual economic agents. Let us merely discuss the question, what
consequences would necessarily follow if, ceteris paribus, with an increasing
quantity of money, prices were restricted to the old level by official compulsion?

II.14.11

An increase in the quantity of money leads to the appearance in the market of new
desire to purchase, which had previously not existed; "new purchasing power," it is
usual to say, has been created. If the new would-be purchasers compete with those
that are already in the market, then, so long as it is not permissible to raise prices,
only part of the total purchasing power can be exercised. This means that there are
would-be purchasers who leave the market without having effected their object
although they were ready to agree to the price demanded, would-be purchasers who
return home with the money with which they set out in order to purchase. Whether
or not a would-be purchaser who is prepared to pay the official price gets the
commodity that he desires depends upon all sorts of circumstances, which are,
from the point of view of the market, quite inessential; for example, upon whether
he was on the spot in time, or has personal relations with the seller, or other similar
accidents. The mechanism of the market no longer works to make a distinction
between the would-be purchasers who are still able to buy and those who are not; it
no longer brings about a coincidence between supply and demand through
variations in price. Supply lags behind demand. The play of the market loses its
meaning; other forces have to take its place.

II.14.12

But the government that puts the newly created notes in circulation does so because
it wishes to draw commodities and services out of their previous avenues in order
to direct them into some other desired employment. It wishes to buy these
commodities and services; not, as is also a quite conceivable procedure, to
commandeer them by force. It must, therefore, desire that everything should be
obtainable for money and for money alone. It is not to the advantage of the
government that a situation should arise in the market that makes some of the
would-be purchasers withdraw without having effected their object. The

II.14.13

would-be purchasers withdraw without having effected their object. The
government desires to purchase; it desires to use the market, not to disorganize it.
But the officially fixed price does disorganize the market in which commodities
and services are bought and sold for money. Commerce, so far as it is able, seeks
relief in other ways. It redevelops a system of direct exchange, in which
commodities and services are exchanged without the instrumentality of money.
Those who are forced to dispose of commodities and services at the fixed prices do
not dispose of them to everybody, but merely to those to whom they wish to do a
favor Would-be purchasers wait in long queues in order to snap up what they can
get before it is too late; they race breathlessly from shop to shop, hoping to find one
that is not yet sold out.
For once the commodities have been sold that were already on the market when
their price was authoritatively fixed at a level below that demanded by the situation
of the market, then the emptied storerooms are not filled again. Charging more than
a certain price is prohibited, but producing and selling have not been made
compulsory. There are no longer any sellers. The market ceases to function. But
this means that economic organization based on division of labor becomes
impossible. The level of money prices cannot be fixed without overthrowing the
system of social division of labor

II.14.14

Thus official fixing of prices, which is intended to establish them and wages
generally below the level that they would attain in a free market, is completely
impracticable. If the prices of individual kinds of commodities and services are
subjected to such restrictions, then disturbances occur that are settled again by the
capacity for adjustment possessed by the economic order based on private property
sufficiently to make the continuance of the system possible. If such regulations are
made general and really put into force, then their incompatibility with the existence
of a social order based upon private property becomes obvious. The attempt to
restrain prices within limits has to be given up. A government that sets out to
abolish market prices is inevitably driven toward the abolition of private property;
it has to recognize that there is no middle way between the system of private
property in the means of production combined with free contract, and the system of
common ownership of the means of production, or socialism. It is gradually forced
toward compulsory production, universal obligation to labor, rationing of
consumption, and, finally, official regulation of the whole of production and
consumption.

II.14.15

This is the road that was taken by economic policy during the war. The etatist, who
had jubilantly proclaimed the state's ability to d o everything it wanted to do,
discovered that the economists had nevertheless been quite right and that it was not
possible to manage with price regulation alone. Since they wished to eliminate the
play of the market, they had to go farther than they had originally intended. The
first step was the rationing of the most important necessaries; but soon compulsory
labor had to be resorted to and eventually the subordination of the whole of
production and consumption to the direction of the state. Private property existed in
name only; in fact, it had been abolished.

II.14.16

The collapse of militarism was the end of wartime socialism also. Yet no better
understanding of the economic problem was shown under the revolution than under
the old regime. All the same experiences had to be gone through again.

II.14.17

The attempts that were made with the aid of the police and the criminal law to
prevent a rise of prices did not come to grief because officials did not act severely
enough or because people found ways of avoiding the regulations. They did not
suffer shipwreck because the entrepreneurs were not public spirited, as the

II.14.18

suffer shipwreck because the entrepreneurs were not public spirited, as the
socialist-etatistic legend has it. They were bound to fail because the economic
organization based upon division of labor and private property in the means of
production can function only so long as price determination in the market is free. If
the regulation of prices had been successful, it would have paralyzed the whole
economic organism. They only thing that made possible the continued functioning
of the social apparatus of production was the incomplete enforcement of the
regulations that was due to the paralysis of the efforts of those who ought to have
executed them.
During thousands of years, in all parts of the inhabited earth, innumerable sacrifices
have been made to the chimera of just and reasonable prices. Those who have
offended against the laws regulating prices have been heavily punished; their
property has been confiscated, they themselves have been incarcerated, tortured,
put to death. The agents of etatism have certainly not been lacking in zeal and
energy. But, for all this, economic affairs cannot be kept going by magistrates and
policemen.

II.14.19

4 The Balance-of-Payments Theory as a Basis of Currency Policy
According to the current view, the maintenance of sound monetary conditions is
only possible with a "credit balance of payments." A country with a "debit balance
of payments" is supposed to be unable permanently to stabilize the value of its
money; the depreciation of the currency is supposed to have an organic basis and to
be irremediable except by the removal of the organic defects.

II.14.20

The confutation of this and related objections is implicit in the quantity theory and
in Gresham's law. The quantity theory shows that money can never permanently
flow abroad from a country in which only metallic money is used (the "purely
metallic currency" of the currency principle). The tightness in the domestic market
called forth by the efflux of part of the stock of money reduces the prices of
commodities, and so restricts importation and encourages exportation, until there is
once more enough money at home. The precious metals which perform the
function of money are distributed among individuals, and consequently among
separate countries, according to the extent and intensity of the demand of each for
money. State intervention to assure to the community the necessary quantity of
money by regulating its international movements is supererogatory. An undesired
efflux of money can never be anything but a result of state intervention endowing
money of different values with the same legal tender All that the state need do, and
can do, in order to preserve the monetary system undisturbed, is to refrain from
such intervention. That is the essence of the monetary theory of the Classical
economists and their immediate successors, the Currency School. It is possible to
refine and amplify this doctrine with the aid of the modern subjective theory; but it
is impossible to overthrow it, and impossible to put anything else in its place.
Those who are able to forget it only show that they are unable to think as
economists.

II.14.21

When a country has substituted credit money or fiat money for metallic money
because the legal equating of the overissued paper and the metallic money sets in
motion the mechanism described by Gresham's law, it is often asserted that the
balance of payments determines the rate of exchange. But this also is a quite
inadequate explanation. The rate of exchange is determined by the purchasing
power possessed by a unit of each kind of money; it must be determined at such a
level that it makes no difference whether commodities are purchased directly with
the one kind of money or indirectly, through money of the other kind. If the rate of
exchange moves away from the position that is determined by the purchasing-

II.14.22

exchange moves away from the position that is determined by the purchasingpower parity, which we call the natural or equilibrium rate, then certain sorts of
transaction would become profitable. It would become lucrative to purchase
commodities with the money that was undervalued by the rate of exchange as
compared with the ratio given by its purchasing power, and to sell them for the
money that was overvalued in the rate of exchange in comparison with its
purchasing power And because there were such opportunities of profit, there would
be a demand on the foreign-exchange market for the money that was undervalued
by the exchanges and this would raise the rate of exchange until it attained its
equilibrium position. Rates of exchange vary because the quantity of money varies
and the prices of commodities vary. As has already been remarked, it is solely
owing to market technique that this basic relationship is not actually expressed in
the temporal sequence of events. In fact, the determination of foreign-exchange
rates, under the influence of speculation, anticipates the expected variations in the
prices of commodities.
The balance-of-payments theory forgets that the volume of foreign trade is
completely dependent upon prices; that neither exportation nor importation can
occur if there are no differences in prices to make trade profitable. The theory
clings to the superficial aspects of the phenomena it deals with. It cannot be
doubted that if we simply look at the daily or hourly fluctuations on the exchanges
we shall only be able to discover that the state of the balance of payments at any
moment does determine the supply and the de exmand in the foreign-exchange
market. But this is a mere beginning of a proper investigation into the determinants
of the rate of exchange. The next question is, What determines the state of the
balance of payments at any moment? And there is no other possible answer to this
than that it is the price level and the purchases and sales induced by the price
margins that determine the balance of payments. Foreign commodities can be
imported, at a time when the rate of exchange is rising, only if they are able to find
purchasers despite their high prices.

II.14.23

One variety of the balance-of-payments theory attempts to distinguish between the
importation of necessaries and the importation of articles that can be dispensed
with. Necessaries, it is said, have to be bought whatever their price is, simply

II.14.24

foreign exchange; it is only because this assumption does not hold good that the
rise in the foreign exchange does not throttle importation and encourage
exportation until there is again a credit balance of payments.
Ancient Mercantilist error therefore involved a specter of which we need not be
afraid. No country, not even the poorest, need abandon the hope of sound currency
conditions. It is not the poverty of individuals and the community, not indebtedness
to foreign nations, not the unfavorableness of the conditions of production, that
force up the rate of exchange, but inflation.

II.14.25

It follows that all the means that are employed for hindering a rise in the exchange
rate are useless. If the inflationary policy continues, they remain ineffective; if
there is no inflationary policy, then they are superfluous. The most important of
these methods is the prohibition or limitation of the importation of certain goods
that are deemed dispensable, or at least less indispensable than others. This causes
the sums of domestic money that would have been used for the purchase of these
commodities to be used for other purchases and naturally the only goods here
concerned are those that would otherwise have been sold abroad. These will now
be purchased at home for prices that are higher than those offered for them abroad.
Thus the reduction of imports and so of the demand for foreign exchange is
balanced on the other side by an equal reduction of exports and so of the supply of
foreign exchange. Imports are in fact paid for by exports and not by money, as
Neo-Mercantilist dilettantism still continues to believe. If it is really desired to dam
up the demand for foreign exchange, then the amount of money to the extent of
which it is desired to stop importation must be taken away from those at home—
say by taxation—and kept out of circulation altogether; that is, not used for state
purposes, but destroyed. That is to say, a deflationary policy must be followed.
Instead of the importation of chocolate, wine, and lemonade being limited, the
members of the community must be deprived of the money that they would
otherwise spend on these commodities. Then they must limit their consumption
either of these or of some other commodities. In the former case, less foreign
exchange will be wanted, in the latter more foreign exchange offered, than
previously.

II.14.26

5 The Suppression of Speculation
It is not easy to determine whether there are any who still adhere in good faith to
the doctrine that traces back the depreciation of money to the activity of
speculators. The doctrine is an indispensable instrument of the lowest form of
demagogy; it is the resource of governments in search of a scapegoat. There are
scarcely any independent writers nowadays who defend it; those who support it are
paid to do so. Nevertheless, a-few words must be devoted to it, for the monetary
policy of the present day is based largely upon it.

II.14.27

Speculation does not determine prices; it has to accept the prices that are
determined in the market. Its efforts are directed to correctly estimating future price
situations, and to acting accordingly. The influence of speculation cannot alter the
average level of prices over a given period; what it can do is to diminish the gap
between the highest and the lowest prices. Price fluctuations are reduced by
speculation, not aggravated, as the popular legend has it.

II.14.28

It is true that the speculator may happen to go astray in his estimate of future
prices. What is usually overlooked in considering this possibility is that under the
given conditions it is far beyond the capacities of most people to foresee the future
any more correctly. If this were not so, the opposing group of buyers or sellers

II.14.29

would have got the upper hand in the market. The fact that the opinion accepted by
the market has later proved to be false is lamented by nobody with more genuine
sorrow than by the speculators who held it. They do not err of malice prepense;
after all, their object is to make profits, not losses.
Even prices that are established under the influence of speculation result from the
cooperation of two parties, the bulls and the bears. Each of the two parties is
always equal to the other in strength and in the extent of its commitments. Each has
an equal responsibility for the determination of prices. Nobody is from the outset
and for all time bull or bear; a dealer becomes a bull or a bear only on the basis of a
summing up of the market situation, or, more correctly, on the basis of the dealings
that follow on such a summing up. Anybody can change his role at any moment.
The price is determined at that level at which the two parties counterbalance each
other. The fluctuations of the foreign-exchange rate are not determined solely by
bears selling but just as much by bulls buying.

II.14.30

The etatistic view traces back the rise in the price of foreign currencies to the
machinations of enemies of the state at home and abroad. These enemies, it is
asserted, dispose of the national currency with a speculative intent and purchase
foreign currencies with a speculative intent. Two cases are conceivable. Either
these enemies are actuated in their dealings by the hope of making a profit, when
the same is true of them as of all other speculators. Or they wish to damage the
reputation of the state of which they are enemies by depressing the value of its
currency, even though they themselves are injured by the operations that lead to
this end. To consider the possibility of such enterprises is to forget that they are
hardly practicable. The sales of the bears, if they ran against the feeling of the
market, would immediately start a contrary movement; the sums disposed of would
be taken up by the bulls in expectation of a coming reaction without any effect on
the rate of exchange worth mentioning.

II.14.31

In truth, these self-sacrificing bear maneuvers that are undertaken, not to make a
profit, but to damage the reputation of the state, belong to the realm of fables. It is
true that operations may well be undertaken on foreign-exchange markets that have
as their aim, not the securing of a profit, but the creation and maintenance of a rate
that does not correspond to market conditions. But this sort of intervention always
proceeds from governments, who hold themselves responsible for the currency and
always have in view the establishment and maintenance of a rate of exchange
above the equilibrium rate. These are artificial bull, not bear, maneuvers. Of
course, such intervention also must remain ineffective in the long run. In fact, there
is only one way in the last resort to prevent a further fall in the value of money—
ceasing to increase the note circulation; and only one way of raising the value of
money—reducing the note circulation. Any intervention, such as that of the
German Reichsbank in the spring of 1923, in which only a small part of the
increasing note expansion was recovered by the banks through the sale of foreign
bills, would necessarily be unsuccessful.

II.14.32

Led by the idea of opposing speculation, inflationistic governments have allowed
themselves to become involved in measures whose meaning is hardly intelligible.
Thus at one time the importation of notes, then their exportation, then again both
their exportation and importation, have been prohibited. Exporters have been
forbidden to sell for their own country's notes, importers to buy with them. All
trade in terms of foreign money and precious metals has been declared a state
monopoly. The quotation of rates for foreign money on home exchanges has been

II.14.33

severely punishable. All these measures have proved useless and would probably
have been more quickly set aside than actually was the case if there had not been
important factors in favor of their retention. Quite apart from the political
significance already referred to attaching to the maintenance of the proposition that
the fall in the value of money was only to be ascribed to wicked speculators, it
must not be forgotten that every restriction of trade creates vested interests that are
from then onward opposed to its removal.
An attempt is sometimes made to demonstrate the desirability of measures directed
against speculation by reference to the fact that there are times when there is
nobody in opposition to the bears in the foreign-exchange market so that they alone
are able to determine the rate of exchange. That, of course, is not correct. Yet it
must be noticed that speculation has a peculiar effect in the case of a currency
whose progressive depreciation is to be expected while it is impossible to foresee
when the depreciation will stop, if at all. While, in general, speculation reduces the
gap between the highest and lowest prices without altering the average price level,
here, where the movement will presumably continue in the same direction, this
naturally cannot be the case. The effect of speculation here is to permit the
fluctuation, which would otherwise proceed more uniformly, to proceed by fits and
starts with the interposition of pauses. If foreign-exchange rates begin to rise, then,
to those speculators who buy in accordance with their own view of the
circumstances, are added large numbers of outsiders. These camp followers
strengthen the movement started by the few that trust to an independent opinion
and send it farther than it would have gone under the influence of the expert
professional speculators alone. For the reaction cannot set in so quic kly and
effectively as usual. Of course, it is the general assumption that the depreciation of
money will go still farther But eventually sellers of foreign money must make an
appearance, and then the rising movement of the exchanges comes to a standstill;
perhaps even a backward movement sets in for a time. Then, after a period of
"stable money," the whole thing begins again.

II.14.34

The reaction admittedly begins late, but it must begin as soon as rates of exchange
have run too far ahead of commodity prices. If the gap between the equilibrium rate
of exchange and the market rate is big enough to give play for profitable
commodity transactions, then there will also arise a speculative demand for the
domestic paper money. Not until the scope for such transactions has again
disappeared owing to a rise in commodity prices will a new rise in the price of
foreign exchange set in.

II.14.35

Etatism eventually comes to regard the possession of foreign money, balances as
such, and foreign bills, as behavior reprehensible in itself. From this point of view,
it is the duty of citizens—not that this is asserted in so many words, but it is the
tone of all official declarations—to put up with the harmful consequences of the
depreciation of money to their private property and to make no attempt to avoid
this by acquiring such possessions as are not eaten up by the depreciation of
money. From the point of view of the individual, they declare, it may indeed appear

II.14.36

individual who takes steps to invest his property in such a way that it cannot be
eaten up by the depreciation of money does not injure the community; on the
contrary, in taking steps to preserve his private property from destruction he also
preserves some of the property of the community from destruction. If he
surrendered it without opposition to the effects of the inflation all he would do
would be to further the destruction of part of the national wealth and enrich those to
whom the inflationary policy brings profit.
It is true that not inconsiderable sections of the best classes of the German people
have given credit to the asseverations of the inflationists and their press. Many
thought that they were doing a patriotic act when they did not get rid of their marks
or kronen and mark or kronen securities, but retained them. By so doing, they did
not serve the fatherland. That they and their families have as a consequence sunk
into poverty only means that some of the members of those classes of the German
people from which the cultural reconstruction of the nation was to be expected are
reduced to a condition in which they are able to help neither the community nor
themselves.

PART THREE
MONEY AND BANKING

CHAPTER 15
The Business of Banking
1 Types of Banking Activity
The business of banking falls into two distinct branches: the negotiation of credit
through the loan of other people's money and the granting of credit through the
issue of fiduciary media, that is, notes and bank balances that are not covered by
money. Both branches of business have always been closely connected. They have
grown up on a common historical soil, and nowadays are still often carried on
together by the same firm. This connection cannot be ascribed to merely external
and accidental factors; it is founded on the peculiar nature of fiduciary media, and
on the historical development of the business of banking. Nevertheless, the two
kinds of activity must be kept strictly apart in economic theory; for only by
considering each of them separately is it possible to understand their nature and
functions. The unsatisfactory results of previous investigations into the theory of
banking are primarily attributable to inadequate consideration of the fundamental
difference between them.

III.15.1

Modern banks, beside their banking activities proper, carry on various other more
or less closely related branches of business. There is, for example, the business of
exchanging money, on the basis of which the beginnings of the banking system in
the Middle Ages were developed, and to which the bill of exchange, one of the
most important instruments of banking activity, owes its origin. Banks still carry on
this business nowadays, but so do exchange bureaus, which perform no banking
functions; and these also devote themselves to such business as the purchase and
sale of securities.

III.15.2

The banks have also taken over a number of functions connected with the general
management of the property of their customers. They accept and look after
securities as "open" deposits, detach interest and dividend coupons as they fall due,
and receive the sums concerned. They superintend the allotment of shares, attend to
the renewal of coupon sheets, and see to other similar matters. They carry out stock
exchange dealings for their customers and also the purchase and sale of securities
that are not quoted on the exchange. They let out strong rooms which are used for
the secure disposal of articles of value under the customer's seal. All of these
activities, whatever their bearing in individual cases upon the profitability of the
whole undertaking, and however great their economic significance for the
community as a whole, yet have no inherent connection with banking proper as we
have defined it above.

III.15.3

The connection between banking proper and the business of speculation and
flotation is similarly loose and superficial. This is the branch of their activities on
which the general economic importance of the banks nowadays depends, and by
means of which on the continent of Europe and in the United States they secured
control of production, no less than of the provision of credit. It would not be easy
to overestimate the influence on the organization of economic life that has been
exerted by the change in the relation of the banks to industry and commerce;

III.15.4

exerted by the change in the relation of the banks to industry and commerce;
perhaps it would not be an exaggeration to describe it as the most important event
in modern economic history. But in connection with the influence of banking on
the exchange ratio between money and other economic goods, which alone
concerns us here, it has no significance at all.
2 The Banks as Negotiators of Credit
The activity of the banks as negotiators of credit is characterized by the lending of
other people's, that is, of borrowed, money. Banks borrow money in order to lend
it; the difference between the rate of interest that is paid to them and the rate that
they pay, less their working expenses, constitutes their profit on this kind of
transaction. Banking is negotiation between granters of credit and grantees of
credit. Only those who lend the money of others are bankers; those who merely
lend their own capital are capitalists, but not bankers.*1 Our use of this definition of
the Classical School should not furnish any ground for terminological controversy.
The expression banking may be extended or contracted as one likes, although there
seems little reason for departing from a terminology that has been usual since
Smith and Ricardo. But one thing is essential: that activity of the banks that
consists in lending other people's money must be sharply distinguished from all
other branches of their business and subjected to separate consideration.

III.15.5

For the activity of the banks as negotiators of credit the golden rule holds, that an
organic connection must be created between the credit transactions and the debit
transactions. The credit that the bank grants must correspond quantitatively and
qualitatively to the credit that it takes up. More exactly expressed, "The date on
which the bank's obligations fall due must not precede the date on which its
corresponding claims can be realized."*2 Only thus can the danger of insolvency be
avoided. It is true that a risk remains. Imprudent granting of credit is bound to
prove just as ruinous to a bank as to any other merchant. That follows from the
legal structure of their business; there is no legal connection between their credit
transactions and their debit transactions, and their obligation to pay back the money
they have borrowed is not affected by the fate of their investments; the obligation
continues even if the investments prove dead losses. But it is just the existence of
this risk which makes it worthwhile for the bank to play the part of an intermediary
between the granter of credit and the grantee of it. It is from the acceptance of this
risk that the bank derives its profits and incurs its losses.

III.15.6

That is all that needs to be said here about this branch of the business of banking.
For as far as money and monetary theory are concerned, even the function of the
banks as negotiators of credit is of significance only so far as it is able to influence
the issue of fiduciary media, which alone will be discussed in the rest of the present
work.

III.15.7

3 The Banks as Issuers of Fiduciary Media
To comprehend the significance of fiduciary media, it is necessary to examine the
nature of credit transactions.

III.15.8

Acts of exchange, whether direct or indirect, can be performed either in such a way
that both parties fulfill their parts of the contract at the same time, or in such a way
that they fulfill them at different times. In the first case we speak of cash
transactions; in the second, of credit transactions. A credit transaction is an
exchange of present goods for future goods.

III.15.9

Credit transactions fall into two groups, the separation of which must form the
starting point for every theory of credit and especially for every investigation into
the connection between money and credit and into the influence of credit on the
money prices of goods. On the one hand are those credit transactions which are
characterized by the fact that they impose a sacrifice on that party who performs his
part of the bargain before the other does—the forgoing of immediate power of
disposal over the exchanged good, or, if this version is preferred, the forgoing of
power of disposal over the surrendered good until the receipt of that for which it is
exchanged. This sacrifice is balanced by a corresponding gain on the part of the
other party to the contract—the advantage of obtaining earlier disposal over the
good acquired in exchange, or, what is the same thing, of not having to fulfill his
part of the bargain immediately. In their respective valuations both parties take
account of the advantages and disadvantages that arise from the difference between
the times at which they have to fulfill the bargain. The exchange ratio embodied in
the contract contains an expression of the value of time in the opinions of the
individuals concerned.

III.15.10

The second group of credit transactions is characterized by the fact that in them the
gain of the party who receives before he pays is balanced by no sacrifice on the part
of the other party. Thus the difference in time between fulfillment and
counterfulfillment, which is just as much the essence of this kind of transaction as
of the other, has an influence merely on the valuations of the one party, while the
other is able to treat it as insignificant. This fact at first seems puzzling, even
inexplicable; it constitutes a rock on which many economic theories have come to
grief. Nevertheless, the explanation is not very difficult if we take into account the
peculiarity of the goods involved in the transaction. In the first kind of credit
transactions, what is surrendered consists of money or goods, disposal over which
is a source of satisfaction and renunciation of which a source of dissatisfaction. In
the credit transactions of the second group, the granter of the credit renounces for
the time being the ownership of a sum of money, but this renunciation (given
certain assumptions that in this case are justifiable) results for him in no reduction
of satisfaction. If a creditor is able to confer a loan by issuing claims which are
payable on demand, then the granting of the credit is bound up with no economic
sacrifice for him. He could confer credit in this form free of charge, if we disregard
the technical costs that may be involved in the issue of notes and the like. Whether
he is paid immediately in money or only receives claims at first, which do not fall
due until later, remains a matter of indifference to him. *3

III.15.11

It seems desirable to choose special names for the two groups of credit transactions
in order to avoid any possible confusion of the concepts. For the first group the
name commodity credit (Sachkredit) is suggested, for the second the name
circulation credit (Zirkulationskredit). It must be admitted that these expressions
do not fully indicate the essence of the distinction that they are intended to
characterize. This objection, however, which can in some degree be urged against
all technical terms, is not of very great importance. A sufficient reply to it is
contained in the fact that there are no better and more apt expressions in use to
convey the distinction intended, which, generally speaking, has not received the
consideration it merits. In any case the expression circulation credit gives occasion
for fewer errors than the expression emission credit (Emissionskredit), which is
sometimes used and has been chosen merely with regard to the issue of notes.
Besides, what applies to all such differences of opinion is also true of this particular
terminological controversy—the words used do not matter; what does matter is
what the words are intended to mean.

III.15.12

Naturally, the peculiarities of circulation credit have not escaped the attention of
economists. It is hardly possible to find a single theorist who has devoted serious

III.15.13

economists. It is hardly possible to find a single theorist who has devoted serious
consideration to the fundamental problems of the value of money and credit
without having referred to the peculiar circumstances in which notes and checks are
used. That this recognition of the individuality of certain kinds of credit
transactions has not led to the distinction of commodity credit and circulation credit
is probably to be ascribed to certain accidents in the history of our science. The
criticism of isolated dogmatic and economico-political errors of the Currency
principle that constituted the essence of most nineteenth-century investigation into
the theory of banking and credit led to an emphasis being pla ced on all the factors
that could be used to demonstrate the essential similarity of notes and other media
of bank credit, and to the oversight of the important differences that exist between
the two groups of credit characterized above, the discovery of which constitutes
one of the permanent contributions of the Classical School and its successors, the
Currency theorists.
The peculiar attitude of individuals toward transactions involving circulation credit
is explained by the circumstance that the claims in which it is expressed can be
used in every connection instead of money. He who requires money, in order to
lend it, or to buy something, or to liquidate debts, or to pay taxes, is not first
obliged to convert the claims to money (notes or bank balances) into money; he can
also use the claims themselves directly as means of payment. For everybody they
therefore are really money substitutes; they perform the monetary function in the
same way as money; they are "ready money" to him, that is, present, not future,
money. The practice of the merchant who includes under cash not merely the notes
and token coinage which he possesses but also any bank balances which he has
constantly at his immediate disposal by means of checks or otherwise is just as
correct as that of the legislator who endows these fiduciary media with the legal
power of settling all obligations contracted in terms of money—in doing which he
only confirms a usage that has been established by commerce.

III.15.14

In all of this there is nothing special or peculiar to money. The objective exchange
value of an indubitably secure and mature claim, which embodies a right to receive
a definite individual thing or a definite quantity of fungible things, does not differ
in the least from the objective exchange value of the thing or quantity of things to
which the claim refers. What is significant for us lies in the fact that such claims to
money, if there is no doubt whatever concerning either their security or their
liquidity, are, simply on account of their equality in objective exchange value to the
sums of money to which they refer, commercially competent to take the place of
money entirely. Anyone who wishes to acquire bread can achieve his aim by
obtaining in the first place a mature and secure claim to bread. If he only wishes to
acquire the bread in order to give it up again in exchange for something else, he can
give this claim up instead and is not obliged to liquidate it. But if he wishes to
consume the bread, then he has no alternative but to procure it by liquidation of the

III.15.15

except in order to get rid of it again, since it never finds a consumer except on
ceasing to be a common medium of exchange, it is quite possible for claims to be
employed in its stead, embodying a right to the receipt on demand of a certain sum
of money and unimpugnable both as to their convertibility in general and as to
whether they really would be converted on the demand of the holder; and it is quite
possible for these claims to pass from hand to hand without any attempt being
made to enforce the right that they embody. The obligee can expect that these
claims will remain in circulation for so long as their holders do not lose confidence
in their prompt convertibility or transfer them to persons who have not this
confidence. He is therefore in a position to undertake greater obligations than he
would ever be able to fulfill; it is enough if he takes sufficient precautions to ensure
his ability to satisfy promptly that proportion of the claims that is actually enforced
against him.
The fact that is peculiar to money alone is not that mature and secure claims to
money are as highly valued in commerce as the sums of money to which they refer,
but rather that such claims are complete substitutes for money, and, as such, are
able to fulfill all the functions of money in those markets in which their essential
characteristics of maturity and security are recognized. It is this circumstance that
makes it possible to issue more of this sort of substitute than the issuer is always in
a position to convert. And so the fiduciary medium comes into being in addition to
the money certificate.

III.15.16

Fiduciary media increase the supply of money in the broader sense of the word;
they are consequently able to influence the objective exchange value of money. To
the investigation of this influence the following chapters are devoted.

III.15.17

4 Deposits as the Origin of Circulation Credit
Fiduciary media have grown up on the soil of the deposit system; deposits have
been the basis upon which notes have been issued and accounts opened that could
be drawn upon by checks. Independently of this, coins, at first the smaller and then
the mediumsized, have developed into fiduciary media. It is usual to reckon the
acceptance of a deposit which can be drawn upon at any time by means of notes or
checks as a type of credit transaction and juristically this view is, of course,
justified; but economically, the case is not one of a credit transaction. If credit in
the economic sense means the exchange of a present good or a present service
against a future good or a future service, then it is hardly possible to include the
transactions in question under the conception of credit. A depositor of a sum of
money who acquires in exchange for it a claim convertible into money at any time
which will perform exactly the same service for him as the sum it refers to, has
exchanged no present good for a future good. The claim that he has acquired by his
deposit is also a present good for him. The depositing of the money in no way
means that he has renounced immediate disposal over the utility that it commands.

III.15.18

Therefore the claim obtained in exchange for the sum of money is equally valuable
to him whether he converts it sooner or later, or even not at all; and because of this
it is possible for him, without damaging his economic interests, to acquire such
claims in return for the surrender of money without demanding compensation for
any difference in value arising from the difference in time between payment and
repayment, such, of course, as does not in fact exist. That this could be so
repeate dly overlooked is to be ascribed to the long accepted and widely accepted
view that the essence of credit consists in the confidence which the lender reposes
in the borrower The fact that anybody hands money over to a bank in exchange for
a claim to repayment on demand certainly shows that he has confidence in the
bank's constant readiness to pay. But this is not a credit transaction, because the

III.15.19

bank's constant readiness to pay. But this is not a credit transaction, because the
essential element, the exchange of present goods for future goods, is absent. But
another circumstance that has helped to bring about the mistaken opinion referred
to is the fact that the business performed by banks in exchanging money for claims
to money payable on demand which can be transferred in the place of money, is
very closely and intimately connected with that particular branch of their credit
business that has most influenced the volume of money and entirely transformed
the whole monetary system of the present day, namely, the provision of circulation
credit. It is with this sort of banking business alone, the issue of notes and the
opening of accounts that are not covered by money, that we are concerned. For this
sort of business alone is of significance in connection with the function and value
of money; the volume of money is affected by no other credit transactions than
these.
While all other credit transactions may occur singly and be per formed on both
sides by persons who do not regularly occupy themselves with such transactions,
the provision of credit through the issue of fiduciary media is only possible on the
part of an undertaking which conducts credit transactions as a matter of regular
business. Deposits must be accepted and loans granted on a fairly considerable
scale before the necessary conditions for the issue of fiduciary media are fulfilled.
Notes cannot circulate unless the person who issues them is known and
trustworthy. Moreover, payment by transfer from one account to another
presupposes either a large circle of customers of the same bank or such a union of
several banking undertakings that the total number of participants in the system is
large. Fiduciary media can therefore be created only by banks and bankers; but this
is not the only business that can be carried on by banks and bankers.

III.15.20

One branch of banking business deserves particular mention because, although
closely related to that circle of banking activities with which we have to deal, it is
quite without influence on the volume of money. This is that deposit business
which does not serve the bank as a basis for the issue of fiduciary media. The
activity carried on here by the bank is merely that of an intermediary, concerning
which the English definition of a banker as a man who lends other people's money
is perfectly apt. The sums of money handed over to the bank by its customers in

III.15.21

the form of savings deposits. On the other hand, the circumstance that competition
among banks has gradually raised the rate of interest on current accounts causes
sums of money that are not needed for current-account purposes, and therefore
might be invested, to be left on current account as a temporary investment.
Nevertheless, these practices do not alter the principle of the matter; it is not the
formal technical aspect of a transaction but its economic character that determines
its significance for us.
From the point of view of the banks there does exist a connection between the two
kinds of deposit business inasmuch as the possib ility of uniting the two reserves
permits of their being maintained at a lower level than their sum would have to be
if they were completely independent. This is extremely important from the point of
view of banking technique, and explains to some degree the advantage of the
deposit banks, which carry on both branches of business, over the savings banks,
which only accept savings deposits (the savings banks being consequently driven to
take up currentaccount business also). For the organization of the banking system
this circumstance is of importance; for the theoretical investigation of its problems
it is negligible.

III.15.22

The essential thing about that branch of banking business which alone needs to be
taken into consideration in connection with the volume of money is this: the banks
that undertake current-account business for their customers are, for the reasons
referred to above, in a position to lend out part of the deposited sums of money. It
is a matter of indifference how they do this, whether they actually lend out a
portion of the deposited money or issue notes to those who want credit or open a
current account for them. The only circumstance that is of importance here is that
the loans are granted out of a fund that did not exist before the loans were granted.
In all other circumstances, whenever loans are granted they are granted out of
existing and available funds of wealth. A bank which neither possesses the right of
note issue nor carries on current-account business for its customers can never lend
out more money than the sum of its own resources and the resources that other
persons have entrusted to it. It is otherwise with those banks that issue notes or
open current accounts. They have a fund from which to grant loans, over and above
their own resources and those resources of other people that are at their disposal.

III.15.23

5 The Granting of Circulation Credit
According to the prevailing opinion, a bank which grants a loan in its own notes
plays the part of a credit negotiator between the borrowers and those in whose
hands the notes happen to be at any time. Thus in the last resort bank credit is not

III.15.24

fiduciary medium instead of money in commercial transactions, and nobody draws
a distinction between the money and the notes which he holds as cash. The note is a
present good just as much as the money.
Notes might be issued by banks in either of two ways. One way is to exchange
them for money. According to accounting principles, the bank here enters into a
debit transaction and a credit transaction; but the transaction is actually a matter of
indifference, since the new liability is balanced by an exactly corresponding asset.
The bank cannot make a profit out of such a transaction. In fact such a transaction
involves it in a loss, since it brings in nothing to balance the expense of
manufacturing the notes and storing the stocks of money. The issue of fully backed
notes can therefore only be carried on in conjunction with the issue of fiduciary
media. This is the second possible way of issuing notes, to issue them as loans to
persons in search of credit. According to the books, this, like the other, is a case of
a credit and a debit transaction only. *5 It is true that this is not shown by the bank's
balance sheet. On the credit side of the balance sheet are entered the loans granted
and the state of the till, and on the debit side, the notes. We approach a better
understanding of the true nature of the whole process if we go instead to the profitand-loss account. In this account there is recorded a profit whose origin is
suggestive—"profit on loans." When the bank lends other people's money as well
as its own resources, part of this profit arises from the difference between the rates
of interest that it pays its depositors and the rates that it charges its borrowers. The
other part arises from the granting of circulation credit. It is the bank that makes
this profit, not the holders of the notes. It is possible that the bank may retain the
whole of it; but sometimes it shares it, either with the holders of the notes or, more
probably, with the depositors. But in either case there is a profit.*6

III.15.25

Let us imagine a country whose monetary circulation consists in 100 million
ducats. In this country a bank-of-issue is established. For the sake of simplicity, let
us assume that the bank's own capital is invested as a reserve outside the banking
business, and that it has to pay the annual interest on this capital to the state in
return for the concession of the right of note issue—an assumption that does
correspond closely with the actual situation of some banks-of-issue. Now let the
bank have fifty million ducats paid into it and issue fifty million ducats' worth of
one-ducat notes against this sum. But we must suppose that the bank does not allow
the whole sum of fifty million ducats to remain in its vaults; it lends out forty
million on interest to foreign businessmen. The interest on these loans consitutes its
gross profit which is reduced only by the cost of manufacture of the notes, by
administrative expenses, and the like. Is it possible in this case to say that the
holders of the notes have granted credit to the foreign debtors of the bank, or to the
bank itself?

III.15.26

Let us alter our example in a nonessential point. Let the bank lend the forty million
not to foreigners but to persons within the country. One of these, A, is indebted to
B for a certain sum, say the cost of goods which he has bought from him. A has no
money at his disposal, but is ready to cede to B a claim maturing in three months,
which he himself holds against P. Can B agree to this? Obviously only if he
himself does not need for the next three months the sum of money which he could
demand immediately, or if he has a prospect of finding somebody who can do
without a corresponding sum of money for three months and is therefore ready to
take over the claim against P. Or the situation might arise in which B wished to buy
goods immediately from C, who was willing to permit postponement of payment
for three months. In such a case, if C was really in agreement with the
postponement, this could only be for one of the three reasons that might also cause
B to be content with payment after the lapse of three months instead of immediate
payment. All these, in fact, are cases of genuine credit transactions, of the exchange

III.15.27

payment. All these, in fact, are cases of genuine credit transactions, of the exchange
of present goods for future goods. Now the number and extent of these transactions
is dependent on the quantity of present goods available; the total of the possible
loans is limited by the total quantity of money and other goods available for this
purpose. Loans can be granted only by those who have disposal over money or
other economic goods which they can do without for a period. Now when the bank
enters the arena by offering forty million ducats on the loan market, the fund
available for lending pur poses is increased by exactly this sum; what immediate
influence this must have on the rate of interest, should not need further explanation.
Is it then correct to say that when the bank discounts bills it does nothing but
substitute a convenient note currency for an inconvenient bill currency? *7 Is the
banknote really nothing but a handier sort of bill of exchange? By no means. The
note that embodies the promise of a solvent bank to pay a sum to the bearer on
demand at any time, that is, immediately if desired, differs in an important point
from the bill that contains the promise to pay a sum of money after the passage of a
period of time. The sight bill, which as is well known) plays no part in the credit
system, is comparable with the note; but not the time bill, which is the form
regularly assumed by the bills that are usual in credit transactions. A person who
pays the price of a purchased commodity in money, in notes, or by the transfer of
any other claim payable on demand, has carried through a cash transaction; a
person who pays the purchase price by the acceptance of a three-month bill has
carried through a credit transaction. *8
Let us introduce a further unessential variation into our example, which will
perhaps help to make the matter clearer. Let us assume that the bank has first issued
notes to the value of fifty million ducats and received for them fifty million ducats
in money; and now let us suppose it to place a further forty million ducats in its
own notes on the loan market. This case is in every way identical with the two
considered above.

III.15.28

The activity of note issue cannot in any way be described as increasing the demand
for credit in the same sense as, say, an increase in the number of bills current. Quite
the contrary. The bank-of-issue does not demand credit; it grants it. When an
additional quantity of bills comes on to the market, this increases the demand for
credit, and therefore raises the rate of interest. The placing of an additional quantity
of notes on the loan market at first has the opposite effect; it constitutes an increase
in the supply of credit and has therefore an immediate tendency to diminish the rate
of interest.*9

III.15.29

It is one of the most remarkable phenomena in the history of political economy that
this fundamental distinction between notes and bills could have passed unnoticed.
It raises an important problem for investigators into the history of economic theory.
And in solving this problem it will be their principal task to show how the
beginnings of a recognition of the true state of affairs that are to be found even in
the writings of the Classical School and were further developed by the Currency
School, were destroyed instead of being continued by the work of those who came
after.*10

III.15.30

6 Fiduciary Media and the Nature of Indirect Exchange
It should be sufficiently clear from what has been said that the traditional way of
looking at the matter is but little in harmony with the peculiarities of fiduciary
media. To regard notes and current accounts, whether they are covered by money
or not, as constituting the same phenomenon, is to bar the way to an adequate

III.15.31

current accounts as granters of credit is to fail to recognize the meaning of a credit
transaction. To treat both notes and bills of exchange in general (that is, not merely
sight bills) as "credit instruments" alike is to renounce all hope of getting to the
heart of the matter.
On the other hand, it is a complete mistake to assert that the nature of an act of
exchange is altered by the employment of fiduciary media. Not only those
exchanges that are carried through by the cession of notes or current-account
balances covered by money, but also those exchanges that are carried through by
the employment of fiduciary media, are indirect exchanges involving the use of
money. Although from the juristic point of view it may be significant whether a
liability incurred in an act of exchange is discharged by physical transference of
pieces of money or by cession of a claim to the immediate delivery of pieces of
money, that is, by cession of a money substitute, this has no bearing upon the
economic nature of the act of exchange. It would be incorrect to assert, for
instance, that when payment is made by check, commodities are really exchanged
against commodities, only without any of the crude clumsiness of primitive
barter.*11 Here, just as in every other indirect exchange made possible by money,
and in contrast to direct exchange, money plays the part of an intermediary between
commodity and commodity. But money is an economic good with its own
fluctuations in value. A person who acquires money or money substitutes will be
affected by all the variations in their objective exchange value. This is just as true
of payment by notes or checks as of the physical transference of pieces of money.
But this is the only point that matters, and not the accidental circumstance whether
money physically "enters into" the transaction as a whole. Anybody who sells
commodities and is paid by means of a check and then immediately uses either the
check itself or the balance that it puts at his disposal to pay for commodities that he
has purchased in another transaction, has by no means exchanged commodities
directly for commodities. He has undertaken two independent acts of exchange,
which are connected no more intimately than any other two purchases.

III.15.32

It is possible that the terminology proposed is not the most suitable that could be
found. This must be freely admitted. But it may at least be claimed for it that it
opens the way to a better comprehension of the nature of the phenomena under
discussion than those that have been previously employed. For if it is not quite true
to say that inexact and superficial terminology has been chiefly responsible for the
frequently unsatisfactory nature of the results of investigations into the theory of
banking, still a good deal of the ill success of such investigations is to be laid to
that account.

III.15.33

That economic theory puts questions of law and banking technique in the
background and draws its boundaries differently from those drawn by
jurisprudence or business administration is or should be self-evident. Reference to
discrepancies between the above theory and the legal or technical nature of
particular procedures is therefore no more relevant as an argument against the
theory than economic considerations would be in the settlement of controversial
juristic questions.

III.15.34

CHAPTER 16
The Evolution of Fiduciary Media
1 The Two Ways of Issuing Fiduciary Media
Thus fiduciary media are claims to the payment of a given sum on demand, which
are not covered by a fund of money and whose legal and technical characteristics
make them suitable for tender and acceptance instead of money in fulfillment of
obligations that are in terms of money. As has already been suggested, it is not the
dead letter of the law so much as actual business practice that counts, so that some
things function as fiduciary media, although they cannot be regarded as promises to
pay money from the juristic point of view, because they nevertheless are in fact
honored as such by somebody or other. We were able to show that, so far as they
are not money certificates, even modern token coins and such kinds of money as
the German thaler during the period from the establishment of the gold standard
until its abolition, constitute fiduciary media and not money.

III.16.1

Fiduciary media may be issued in two ways: by banks, and otherwise. Bank
fiduciary media are characterized by being dealt with as constituting a debt of the
issuing body. They are entered as liabilities, and the issuing body does not regard
the sum issued as an increase of its income or capital, but as an increase on the
debit side of its account, which must be balanced by a corresponding increase on
the credit side if the whole transaction is not to figure as a loss. This way of dealing
with fiduciary media makes it necessary for the issuing body to regard them as part
of its trading capital and never to spend them on consumption but always to invest
them in business. These investments need not always be loans; the issuer may
himself carry on a productive enterprise with the working capital that is put into his
hands by the issue of fiduciary media. It is known that some deposit banks
sometimes open deposit accounts without a money cover not only for the purpose
of granting loans, but also for the purpose of directly procuring resources for
production on their own behalf. More than one of the modern credit and
commercial banks has invested a part of its capital in this manner, and the question
of the right attitude in this case of the holders of the money substitutes, and of the
state legislature that feels itself called upon to protect them, remains an open one.
In earlier times there was a similar problem concerning banks issuing notes*12 until
banking practice or the law prescribed short-term loans as "cover."

III.16.2

The issuer of fiduciary media may, however, regard the value of the fiduciary
media put into circulation as an addition to his income or capital. If he does this, he
will not take the trouble to cover the increase in his obligations due to the issue by
setting aside a special credit fund out of his capital. He will pocket the profits of the
issue, which in the case of token coinage is called seigniorage, as composedly as
any other sort of income.

III.16.3

The only difference between the two ways of putting fiduciary media into
circulation lies in the attitude of the issuer. Naturally, this cannot have any
significance for the determination of the value of the fiduciary media. The
difference between the methods of issue is a result of historical factors. Fiduciary
media have sprung from two different roots: from the activities of the deposit and
giro banks on the one hand, and from the state prerogative of minting on the other
hand. The former is the source of notes and current accounts; the latter, that of
convertible Treasury notes, token coins, and that current money of which the
coinage is restricted, but which can be regarded neither as credit money nor as fiat
money because it is actually convertible into money on demand to its full amount.

III.16.4

money because it is actually convertible into money on demand to its full amount.
Today the difference between the two methods of issuing is gradually disappearing,
all the more as the state endeavors to act in the same way as the banks in issuing
fiduciary media. Some states are already in the habit of devoting the profits of their
coinage to special purposes and of refusing to treat them in any way as an increase
of wealth.*13
Of the two types of money substitutes issued by the banks, the current account is
the older. The banknote, in fact, is only a development of it. It is true that the two
are different in the eyes of the law and the banker, but they do not differ at all in the
eyes of the economist. The only distinctions between them are in those legal or
banking or commercial peculiarities of the banknote which give it a special
capacity of circulation. It is easily transferable and very like money in the way in
which it is transferred. Banknotes were therefore able to outstrip the older money
substitute, the current account, and penetrate into commerce with extraordinary
rapidity. For medium and small payments they offer such great advantages that the
current account was hardly able to maintain its ground beside them. It was not until
the second half of the nineteenth century that the current account once more
became important along with the banknote. In large transactions, check and
clearing payments are often superior to notes. But the chief reason why the current
account was able in part to expel the banknote must by no means be sought in any
inherent requirements of business. The current account is not, as it is sometimes the
fashion to assert without any reason or proof, a "higher" form of money substitute
than the banknote. The banknote has been supplanted by the current account in
many countries because its development was artificially hindered and that of the
current account artificially encouraged, the reason for this being that acceptance of
the doctrines of the Currency principle led people to see danger for the stability of
the exchange ratio between money and other economic goods only in the overissue
of notes, and not in the excessive increase of bank deposits.

III.16.5

For the study of the credit system from the economic point of view, the contrast
between notes and deposits is of minor importance. There are payments for which
one or other form is the more suitable, and payments for which both forms are
suitable. If their development had been allowed to take its own course, this fact
would undoubtedly have been more evident than it is today when the attempt is
sometimes made to bring about the employment of one or other kind of fiduciary
medium by artificial means in circumstances where it appears the less appropriate
technically.

III.16.6

2 Fiduciary Media and the Clearing System
That want of clarity concerning the nature of fiduciary media which constitutes the
chief characteristic of the writings of the banking theorists and their epigoni, the
modern writers on problems of banking theory, leads to a perpetual confusion
between money substitutes and a series of institutions which reduce the demand for
money in the narrower sense, and also to relative neglect of the differences that
exist between money certificates and fiduciary media within the group of money
substitutes proper.

III.16.7

The economic effect of an exchange that is carried out with the help of a certain
quantity of a fungible good, can sometimes, if several persons have to transact
business at the same time, be attained more indirectly in ways which, while they
are formally of a more complicated legal structure, nevertheless fundamentally
simplify the technical transaction and make it possible to dispense in particular
instances with the physical presence of pieces of the medium of exchange. If A has
to deliver a piece of cloth to B and receive a sheep from him for it, and if A at the

III.16.8

to deliver a piece of cloth to B and receive a sheep from him for it, and if A at the
same time has to give a sheep to C and receive from him a horse, these two
exchanges can also be transacted if B gives a sheep to C on behalf and on account
of A, so freeing himself from the obligation that he is under to give A a sheep in
return for the cloth and A from the obligation that he is under to give C a sheep in
return for the horse. Whereas the direct transaction of these two exchanges would
have necessitated four transfers, this procedure necessitates only three.
The possibility of facilitating exchanges in this way is extraordinarily increased by
extension of the custom of using certain goods as common media of exchange. For
the number of cases in which anybody simultaneously owes and has a cla im to a
certain fungible good will increase with the number of cases in which one and the
same fungible good—the common medium of exchange—is the object of exchange
in individual transactions. Full development of the use of money leads at first to a
splitting up into two acts of indirect exchange even of such transactions as could in
any case have been carried through by direct exchange. The butcher and the baker,
who could also exchange their products directly, often prefer to have their mutual
relations take the form of an exchange carried through with the help of money
which their other transactions assume also. The butcher sells meat to the baker for
money and the baker sells bread to the butcher for money. This gives rise to
reciprocal money claims and money obligations. But it is clear that a settlement can
be arrived at here, not only by each party actually handing money over to the other,
but also by means of offsetting, in which merely the balance remaining over is
settled by payment of money. To complete the transaction in this way by full or
partial cancellation of counterclaims offers important advantages in comparison
with direct exchange: all the freedom connected with the use of money is combined
with the technical simplicity that characterizes direct exchange transactions.

III.16.9

This method of carrying through indirect exchanges by cancellation of
counterclaims is very greatly stimulated at the time when the cases where its
employment is possible are increased by the fact that credit transactions, or the
exchange of present goods for future goods, are becoming customary. When all
exchanges have to be settled in ready cash, then the possibility of performing them
by means of cancellation is limited to the case exemplified by the butcher and
baker and only then on the assumption, which of course only occasionally holds
good, that the demands of both parties are simultaneous. At the most, it is possible
to imagine that several other persons might join in and so a small circle be built up
within which drafts could be used for the settlement of transactions without the
actual use of money. But even in this case simultaneity would still be necessary,
and, several persons being involved, would be still seldomer achieved.

III.16.10

These difficulties could not be overcome until credit set business free from
dependence on the simultaneous occurrence of demand and supply. This, in fact, is
where the importance of credit for the monetary system lies. But this could not
have its full effect so long as all exchange was still direct exchange, so long even as
money had not established itself as a common medium of exchange. The
instrumentality of credit permits transactions between two persons to be treated as
simultaneous for purposes of settlement even if they actually take place at different
times. If the baker sells bread to the cobbler daily throughout the year and buys
from him a pair of shoes on one occasion only, say at the end of the year, then the
payment on the part of the baker, and naturally on that of the cobbler also, would
have to be made in cash, if credit did not provide a means first for delaying the one
party's liability and then for settling it by cancellation instead of by cash payment.

III.16.11

Exchanges made with the help of money can also be settled in part by offsetting if
claims are transferred within a group until claims and counterclaims come into

III.16.12

claims are transferred within a group until claims and counterclaims come into
being between the same persons, these being then canceled against each other, or
until the claims are acquired by the debtors themselves and so extinguished. In
interlocal and international dealing in bills, which has been developed in recent
years by the addition of the use of checks and in other ways which have not
fundamentally changed its nature, the same sort of thing is carrie d out on an
enormous scale. And here again credit increases in a quite extraordinary fashion the
number of cases in which such offsetting is feasible.*14 In all these cases we have an
exchange made with the help of money which is nevertheless transacted without
the actual use of money or money substitutes simply by means of a process of
offsetting between the parties. Money in these cases is still a medium of exchange,
but its employment in this capacity is independent of its physical existence. Use is
made of money, but not physical use of actually existing money or money
substitutes. Money which is not present performs an economic function; it has its
effect solely by reason of the possibility of its being able to be present.
The reduction of the demand for money in the broader sense which is brought
about by the use of offsetting processes for settling exchanges made with the help
of money, without affecting the function performed by money as a medium of
exchange, is based upon the reciprocal cancellation of claims to money. The use of
money is avoided because claims to money are transferred instead of actual money.
This process is continued until claim and debt come together, until creditor and
debtor are united in the same person. Then the claim to money is extinguished,
since nobody can be his own creditor or his own debtor.*15 The same result may be
reached at an earlier stage by reciprocal cancellation, that is by the liquidation of
counterclaims by a process of offsetting. *16 In either case the claim to money ceases
to exist, and then, and not until then, is the act of exchange which gave birth to the
claim finally completed.

III.16.13

Any transfer of a claim which does not bring it nearer to being extinguished by
cancellation or offsetting cannot decrease the demand for money. In fact, if the
transfer of the claim is not instead of payment in money, then it is on the contrary
the source of a fresh demand for money. Now cession of claims instead of payment
in money has, apart from the use of money substitutes, never been of very great
commercial importance. As far as claims that are already due are concerned, the
holder will as a rule prefer to call in the outstanding sums of money, because he
will invariably find it easier to buy (and carry through other transactions in the
market) with money or money substitutes than with claims whose goodness has not
been indisputably established. But if the holder does in exceptional cases transfer
such a claim by way of payment, then the new holder will be in the same position.
A further hindrance to the transfer of claims to money that are not yet due instead
of payment in money is the fact that such claims can be accepted only by such
persons as are able to agree to postponement of payment; to rest content with a
claim that is not yet due , when immediate payment could be enforced, is to grant
credit.

III.16.14

Commercial requirements had previously made use of the legal institution of the
bill in a way that caused it to circulate in a manner fairly similar to that of fiduciary
media. Toward the end of the eighteenth and at the beginning of the nineteenth
century bills were current in the European commercial centers which were
endorsed by the merchants in place of payment in money. *17 Since it was the general
custom to make payments in this way, anybody could accept a bill that still had
some time to run even when he wanted cash immediately; for it was possible to
reckon with a fair amount of certainty that those to whom payments had to be made
would also accept a bill not yet mature in place of ready money. It is perhaps
hardly necessary to add that in all such transactions the element of time was of

III.16.15

hardly necessary to add that in all such transactions the element of time was of
course taken into consideration, and discount consequently allowed for. Now it is
true that this might increase the technical difficulties in handling the circulatory
apparatus, which was already not an easy matter to deal with for other reasons,
such, for example, as the different amounts of the bills. But, on the other hand, it
offered a profit to any holder who did not pass the bill on immediately but kept it
for a while, even if only for a very short while, in his portfolio. Used in this way,
the bill was able to make up to a certain extent for the lack of fiduciary media.
Even though it might not be due for a long time ahead, the holder could regard it as
liquid, because he could pass it on at any time.
Despite this, bills of this sort were not fiduciary media in the sense in which notes
or deposits are. They lack the characteristic features and properties which enabled
the fiduciary medium, the indefinitely augmentable product of the arbitrary issuing
activity of the banks, to become a complete substitute for money for business
purposes. It is true that the cooperation of issuers and acceptors can give the
circulation of bills the capacity of unlimited augmentation and unlimited lease of
life through the agency of bill jobbing and regular prolongation, even if technical
difficulties alone are sufficient to prevent the bills from ever being used in business
to the same extent as money substitutes. But every increase in the amount of bills
in circulation makes negotiation of individual bills more difficult. It reduces the
resources of the market. In fact, the holder of a bill, as distinct from the holder of a
note or of a current account, is a creditor A person who accepts a bill must examine
the standing of the previous endorser, and also that of the issuer and the others who
are liable for the bill, but in particular the primary acceptor Whoever passes a bill
on, in endorsing it undertakes responsibility for the payment of the amount of the
bill. The endorsement of the bill is in fact not a final payment; it liberates the
debtor to a limited degree only. If the bill is not paid then his liability is revived in
a greater degree than before. But the peculiar rigor of the law relating to its
enforcement and the responsibility of its signatories could not be eliminated, for it
was these very characteristics alone that had made the bill a suitable instrument for
the cession, in place of money payment, of unmatured claims for which the
common-law provisions regarding indebtedness are little suited. To whatever
extent the custom of issuing or endorsing bills in place of payment in money may
have established itself, every single payment that was made in this way
nevertheless retained the character of a credit transaction. It was necessary in each
individual case for the parties to the transaction to begin by coming to a special
agreement as to the present price to be paid for the claim that would not fall due
until some future time; if the amount of bills in circulation increased greatly, or if
doubts happened to arise concerning the solidity of the position of any of the
signatories, then it became more difficult to place the bill even on fairly tolerable
terms. Issuer and acceptor had then in addition to make arrangements for covering
the bill before it fell due, even if only by negotiating a prolongation bill. There is
none of this in the case of fiduciary media, which pass like money from hand to
hand without any sort of friction.

III.16.16

The modern organization of the payment system makes use of institutions for
systematically arranging the settlement of claims by offsetting processes. There
were beginnings of this as early as the Middle Ages, but the enormous
development of the clearinghouse belongs to the last century. In the clearinghouse,
the claims continuously arising between members are subtracted from one another
and only the balances remain for settlement by the transfer of money or fiduciary
media. The clearing system is the most important institution for diminishing the
demand for money in the broader sense.

III.16.17

In the literature of the banking system it is not as a rule customary to draw a
sufficient distinction between the diminution of the demand for money in the
broader sense which is due to the operations of the clearinghouses and the
diminution of the demand for money in the narrower sense which is due to the
extension of the use of fiduciary media. This is the cause of much obscurity.

III.16.18

3 Fiduciary Media in Domestic Trade
In the domestic trade of most civilized countries, the actual use of money for
transacting exchanges made with the help of money has been very largely
superseded by the use of money substitutes. And among the money substitutes,
fiduciary media play a constantly increasing part. At the same time, the number of
exchanges made with the help of money which are settled by the offsetting of
counterclaims is growing also. There are countries in which nearly all the internal
payments that are not settled by the clearing process are made without the use of
money merely with the aid of banknotes and deposits that are not covered by
money, of token coins in the proper sense of the word, and of other coins
convertible on demand into money. In other countries, again, the fiduciary medium
has not yet been developed to a like extent; but if we disregard those countries in
which the insecurity of the law hinders the birth of that confidence in the soundness
of the issuer which is the sine qua non for the circulation of money substitutes, then
we shall find no part of the world in which a large proportion of the internal
payments are not made by means of the use of fiduciary media alone, without the
actual transference of money. It is only in medium-sized transactions that there is
still room for the transference of actual money. In Germany and England before the
war it was usual to make payments of twenty to one hundred marks and £1 and £5
by the transference of gold coins. Smaller and larger payments were made almost
exclusively by the cession of token coins or notes or deposits which were only
partly covered by money. It was the same in other countries.

III.16.19

The fact that money continued to be in actual circulation at all in a series of states,
like Germany and England, and was not entirely superseded by fiduciary media and
money certificates, was due solely to legislative intervention. For reasons which
were connected with certain views on the nature of notes, it was thought that the
circulation of notes of small denominations ought to be opposed. *18 The battle
against the one-pound note in England ended with the complete victory of the
sovereign, and this victory had a significance outside England, too, for the disfavor
in which small banknotes were held for decades on the continent of Europe was
based upon English opinion. It is certain that in those states which have a sound
administration of justice and a developed banking system, the employment of
actual money in commerce could be replaced without difficulty by the issue of a
corresponding quantity of small notes.

III.16.20

In some countries in which the actual transfer of money has been completely
superseded by fiduciary media and money certificates, this end has been
systematically sought and attained in a peculiar fashion and under very peculiar
conditions. The silver-standard countries—India, primarily, but the situation was
similar in other Asiatic states—after the great controversy about the standards had
been decided in favor of monometallism, were forced to accept the world gold
standard. But there were extraordinary difficulties in the way of the transition to a
monetary system in imitation of English of German institutions. To introduce gold
money in the circulation of these countries would have necessitated the conveyance
of enormous quantities of gold to them, which would not have been practicable
without serious convulsion of the European money market and would have meant
great sacrifice. The governments of these countries, however, had to endeavor at all
costs on the one hand not to raise the value of gold (so as not to disturb the

III.16.21

costs on the one hand not to raise the value of gold (so as not to disturb the
European markets), and on the other hand not to reduce the value of silver any
more than was necessary. The English government in India did not dare to
undertake anything which might have had an unfavorable influence on the London
money market; but, having regard to India's Asiatic competitors, which presumably
would remain on the silver standard, neither did it dare to take any steps which
would expedite the fall in the price of silver and consequently weaken for a time,
even if only in appearance, the ability of India to compete with China, Japan, the
Straits Settlements, and the other silver countries. It therefore had the task of
conducting India's transition to the gold standard without buying gold in
considerable quantities or selling silver.
The problem was not insoluble. Within limits, the circumstances were similar to
those of the bimetallic countries which had discontinued the free coinage of silver
at the end of the seventies. And besides, careful scientific consideration of the
problem showed that it was possible to create a gold standard without a gold
currency; that it was enough to discontinue the free coinage of silver and to
announce its convertibility into gold at a specific rate, making this effective by
establishing a suitable conversion fund, in order to give the country a gold standard
which would differ from that of England only in the lower level of the stock of
gold. It was only necessary to go back to the writings of Ricardo in order to find
the plan for such a currency system already worked out in detail. Lindsay*19 and
Probyn*20 followed this path and, building upon Ricardo, worked out plans for this
kind of currency regulation. Both wanted to close the mints to silver and to make
the rupee convertible into gold at a fixed ratio. For the future, only the rupee was to
be legal tender. The two proposals differed on some minor points, of which the
most important was that while Probyn held it necessary that the rupee should be
convertible into gold in India itself, Lindsay was of the opinion that it would
suffice if the conversion were to be in London from a gold reserve to be established
there. Both proposals were rejected, by the Indian government and by the
commissions appointed to inquire into the Indian monetary system. The opinion
was expressed that a normal gold standard necessitates an actual gold currency, and
that the lack of such a currency would awaken mistrust.*21

III.16.22

The report of the commission of 1898 was signed by the most eminent experts of
the day; its comments on the recommendations of Probyn and Lindsay were
supported on the decisive point by the expert opinions of the biggest bankers in the
British Empire. The course of events vindicated the theorists, however, not the
statesmen and great financiers who had regarded them with amused commiseration.
What was ultimately done in India corresponded roughly and on the whole to the
recommendations of Probyn and Lindsay, even if there were variations in detail.
And the monetary systems of other countries that had previously been on a silver

III.16.23

coins at a fixed ratio for gold, gold securities, or other claims to money, payable on
demand, while, on the other hand, it issues such silver coins in exchange for gold in
unlimited quantities at the same rate, allowance being made for the expenses of
storage, transportation, etc. The minor details of this arrangement differ in different
countries; but the differences in its legal or banking technique are insignificant as
far as its nature is concerned. It is, for example, of no further significance, whether
or not the silver coins are converted on the basis of a legal obligation. All that
matters is whether the conversion actually does take place on demand. *22
There exists no fundamental difference at all between the currency system of these
Asiatic and American countries and that that the European gold-standard countries
once had. Under both systems, payments are made without the actual transference
of money by the aid of the surrender of fiduciary media. The fact that in England
and Germany the actual transference of money also played a certain part for
medium-sized payments, whereas in India and in the Philippines the number of
actual transfers of money is scarcely worth mentioning, or that in the former
countries the proportion of the circulation that was not covered by money was
smaller than in the latter, is quite inessential; it is a difference that is merely
quantitative, not qualitative. Of no great relevance is the circumstance that the
fiduciary media were in the one case predominantly banknotes and checks and are
in the other case predominantly silver coins. The silver rupee is in truth nothing but
a metallic note, for the conversion of which its issuer, the state, is responsible.*23

III.16.24

Following up a train of thought of Ricardo's, who was the first to develop the plan
of this monetary system more than a hundred years ago,*24 it is customary to speak
of it as the gold-exchange standard. The aptness of this designation can only be
conceded if it is intended to stress the peculiarities in banking and currency
technique that characterize the system. But it is a name that must be rejected if it is
intended to indicate the existence of a fundamental difference from what used to be
the English and German type of gold standard. It is not correct to assert that in
these countries gold functions merely as a measure of prices while the silver coins
are used as a common medium of exchange. We know what little justification there
is for speaking of a price-measuring function of money. In Ricardo's sense, it was
possible to speak of measurement and measures of value; from the point of view of
the subjective theory of value these and similar concepts are untenable. In India and
Austria -Hungary and in all other countries with similar currency and banking
systems, gold is or was just as much a common medium of exchange as in prewar
England or Germany; the difference between the two systems is only one of degree,
not one of kind.

III.16.25

4 Fiduciary Media in International Trade
The practice of making payments by the writing off or reciprocal balancing of
claims is not restricted by the boundaries of states or countries. It was in fact in
trade between different areas that the need for it was earliest and most strongly felt.
The transportation of money always involves not inconsiderable cost, loss of
interest, and risk. If the claims arising out of various transactions are liquidated not

III.16.26

advantages for the individual of the method of settling transactions by the clearing
process and therefore without the use of cash are smaller than those when making
payments between localities, and therefore it was a longer time before the system of
reciprocal cancellation came into full operation with the establishment of
clearinghouses.
If the clearing system has without difficulty transcursed political boundaries and
created for itself a world-embracing organization in the international bill and check
system, the validity of the fiduciary media, like that of all money substitutes, is
nationally limited. There are no money substitutes, and so no fiduciary media, that
are recognized internationally and consequently able to take the place of money in
international trade for settling the balances that remain over after the clearing
process. That is often overlooked in discussions of the present position of the
international system of payments and the possibilities of its future development.
Here again, in fact, the confusion creeps in, that has already been criticized
adversely, between the system of reciprocal cancellation and the circulation of
fiduciary media. This is most clear in the usual arguments about international giro
transactions. In domestic giro transactions, payments are effected by the transfer of
money substitutes, which are often fiduciary media, namely, the balances of the
members at the giro bank. In international transactions, the money substitute is
lacking, and even the international clearing system that is recommended in various
quarters is not intended to introduce one. Rather it should be pointed out that this
so-called international giro system—which incidentally was done away with again
by the inflation during the war—while it may have changed the external form of
the traditional manner of settling international monetary claims, has not changed in
nature. When banks of various countries agree to give their clients the right to
undertake direct transference from their balances to the balances of the clients of
foreign banks, this may quite well constitute a new and additional method of
international settlement of accounts. A Viennese desirous of paying a sum of
money to somebody in Berlin was previously able either to use an international
money order or to go to the exchange and buy a bill on Berlin and send it to his
creditor As a rule he would have made use of the intermediate services of a bank,
which for its part would perform the transaction through the purchase of a foreign
bill or a check. Later, if he was a member of the check system of the Austrian Post
Office Savings Bank and his creditor belonged to that of the German post office, he
would have been able to make the transfer more simply by sending the appropriate
order on the Vienna office of the Post Office Savings Bank. This might well be
more convenient and better suited to the demands of business than the only method
that was once usual; but, however excellent a method, it was not a new method of
internatio nal monetary intercourse. For the balances of this international giro
system, if they could not be paid by bills, had to be paid by the actual transference
of money. It is not true that the international giro system has decreased the
international transportation of money. Even before its introduction, the Viennese
who wanted to pay money to somebody in Berlin did not buy twenty-mark pieces
and send them to Berlin in a parcel.

III.16.27

The only thing calculated to create international money substitutes and
subsequently international fiduciary media would be the establishment of an
international giro bank or bank-of-issue. When it became possible to use the notes
issued by the world bank and the accounts opened by it for the settlement of money
claims of all kinds, there would no longer be any need to settle the national

III.16.28

even by simple entries in the books of the world bank. The balances of the
international "clearinghouse," which already exists today although it is not
concentrated in any one locality and has not the rigid organization of the national
clearinghouses, would then be paid off in the same way as those of the national
clearinghouses are at present.
Proposals have been made again and again for the creation of international
fiduciary media through the establishment of an interstate bank. It is true that this
must not be taken to include every project for extending the international giro
system in the sense in which this word is commonly used. Nevertheless, in certain
writings which demand the foundation of a world bank, or at least of an interstate
banking organization, there gleams the idea of an international fiduciary medium. *25
The problems of organization raised by the establishment of such an international
institution could be solved in various ways. The establishment of the world bank as
a special form of organization and as an independent legal body would probably be
the simplest form for the new creation. It would, however, also be possible, apart
from this, to establish a special central authority for administering and investing the
sums of money paid in to open the accounts, and for issuing the money substitutes.
An attempt could be made to avoid the obstructions which the susceptibilities of
national vanity would probably oppose to the local concentration of the business of
the bank by leaving the reserves of the world giro authority and the world issuing
authority in the keeping of the separate national banks. In the reserves of every
central bank a distinction would then have to be made between two sums: one,
which would have to serve as a basis for the world organization of the system of
payments, and over which only the authorities of the latter would have power of
disposal; and a second, which would continue to be at the service of the national
monetary system. It would even be possible to go still further and leave the issue of
international notes and other money substitutes to the individual banks, which
would only be required in doing this to follow the instructions given by the
authorities of the world organization. It is not our task to investigate which of the
various possibilities is the most practical; it is its nature alone that interests us, not
the actual form it might take.

III.16.29

Special reference must nevertheless be made to one point. If the balances in the
books of the world bank are to be acquired only by cash payment of the full sum in
money, or by transfer from some other account that has been acquired by cash
payment of the full sum in money, and if the world bank is to issue notes only in
exchange for money, then its establishment may certainly render unnecessary the
transportation of quantities of money (which still plays a large part nowadays in the
international payments system), but it would not have the effect of economizing
money payments. It is true that it would be able to reduce the demand for money,
because transferences would perhaps be completed more quickly and with less
friction. But, as before, the payments that were made through the bank would
involve the actual use of money. Of course, the money would remain in the vaults
of the world bank and only the right to demand its surrender would be transferred.
But the amount of the payments would be arithmetically limited by the amount of
the money deposits in the bank. The possibility of trans ferring sums of money
would be bound up with the existence of these sums of money in actual monetary
shape. In order to free the international monetary system from these fetters the
world bank would have to be granted the right of issuing notes as loans also and of
opening accounts on credit; that is to say, the right of partly lending out its reserves
of money. Then, and not until then, would the interstate system of payments be
given a fiduciary medium such as is already possessed by the domestic system; it
would become independent of the quantity of money in existence.

III.16.30

The realization of a world-bank project developed in this way is opposed by
tremendous obstacles which it would hardly be possible to surmount in the near
future. The least of these obstacles is constituted by the variety of the kinds of
money that are in use in the individual states. Nevertheless, in spite of the inflation
that was created by the world war and its consequences, we are every day
approaching nearer and nearer to the situation of having a world monetary unit
based on the metallic money gold. More important are the difficulties due to
political considerations. The establishment of a world bank might come to grief
owing to the uncertainty of its position in international law. No state would wish to
incur the danger of the accounts of its citizens being impounded by the world bank
in case of war. This involves questions of primary importance and therefore no
provisions of international law, however surrounded with precautions they might
be, could satisfy the individual states so far as to overcome their opposition to
membership in such an organization. *26
Nevertheless, the biggest difficulty in the way of issuing international credit
instruments lies in the circumstance that it would scarcely be possible for the states
that had joined the world-banking system to come to an agreement concerning the
policy to be followed by the bank in issuing the credit instruments. Even the
question of determining the quantity of them to be issued would disclose
irreconcilable antagonisms. Under present conditions, therefore, proposals for the
establishment of a world bank with power of issuing fiduciary media attract hardly
any notice.*27

III.16.31

CHAPTER 17
Fiduciary Media and the Demand for Money
1 The Influence of Fiduciary Media on the Demand for Money in the Narrower
Sense
The development of the clearing system, especially the extension of the
clearinghouse proper, reduces the demand for money in the broader sense: part of
the exchanges made with the help of money can be carried through without the
actual physical circulation of money or money substitutes. Thus a tendency has
arisen toward the reduction of the objective exchange value of money, whic h has
counteracted the tendency for it to rise which was bound to result from the
enormous increase in the demand for money in consequence of the progressive
extension of the exchange economy. The development of fiduciary media has the
same sort of effect; fiduciary media, which can, as money substitutes, take the
place of money in commerce, reduce the demand for money in the narrower sense.
This constitutes the great significance of fiduciary media, in this their effect on the
exchange ratio between money and other economic goods is to be sought.

III.17.1

The development of fiduciary media, the most important institution for reducing
the need for money in the narrower sense, equally with the establishment and
development of clearinghouses, the most important institution for reducing the
need for money in the broader sense, has not been merely left to the free play of
economic forces. The demand for credit on the part of merchants and
manufacturers and princes and states, and the endeavor to make a profit on the part
of the bankers, were not the sole forces affecting its development. Intervention took
place with the object of furthering and expediting the process. As the naive Midaslike trust in the usefulness of a large stock of precious metals disappeared and was
replaced by sober consideration of the monetary problem, so the opinion gained
strength that a reduction of the national demand for money in the narrower sense
constituted an outstanding economic interest. Adam Smith suggested that the
expulsion of gold and silver by paper, that is to say notes, would substitute for an
expensive means of exchange a less expensive, which, however, would perform the
same service. He compares gold and silver which is circulating in a country with a
road over which all the corn has to be brought to market but on which nevertheless
nothing grows. The issue of notes, he says, creates, as it were, a path through the
air and makes it possible to turn a large part of the roads into fields and meadows
and in this way considerably to increase the annual yield of land and labor.*28
Similar views are entertained by Ricardo. He also sees the most fundamental
advantage of the use of notes in the diminution of the cost to the community of the
apparatus of circulation. His ideal monetary system is one which would ensure to
the community with the minimum cost the use of a money of invariable value.
Starting from this point of view, he formulates his recommendatio ns, which aim at
expelling money composed of the precious metal from actual domestic
circulation. *29

III.17.2

The views on the nature of methods of payment which diminish the demand for
money, which were developed by the Classical economists, were already known in
the eighteenth century. Their acceptance in the writings of the Classical economists
and the brilliant way in which they were expounded, ensured general recognition
for them in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries also. The opposition which they
occasionally called forth, has now sunk into silence. In all countries the aim of
banking policy is to secure the greatest possible extension of money-economizing
means of payment.

III.17.3

If metallic money is employed, then the advantages of a diminution of the demand
for money due to the extension of such other means of payment are obvious. In
fact, the development of the clearing system and of fiduciary media has at least
kept pace with the potential increase of the demand for money brought about by the
extension of the money economy, so that the tremendous increase in the exchange
value of money, which otherwise would have occurred as a consequence of the
extension of the use of money, has been completely avoided, together with its
undesirable consequences. If it had not been for this the increase in the exchange
value of money, and so also of the monetary metal, would have given an increased
impetus to the production of the metal. Capital and labor would have been diverted
from other branches of production to the production of the monetary metal. This
would undoubtedly have meant increased returns to certain individual
undertakings; but the welfare of the community would have suffered. The increase
in the stock of precious metals which serve monetary purposes would not have
improved the position of the individual members of the community, would not
have increased the satisfaction of their wants; for the monetary function could also
have been fulfilled by a smaller stock. And, on the other hand, a smaller quantity of
economic goods would have been available for the direct satisfaction of human
wants if a part of the capital and labor power that otherwise would have been used
for their production had been diverted to mining precious metals. Even apart from
the diversion of production, a decrease of prosperity would result from the fact that
as a consequence of the rise in value of the precious metals caused by the use for
monetary purposes the stock available for industrial employment would decrease,
since certain quantities would be transferred from the latter employment to the
former This all becomes particularly clear if we think of an economic community
which does not itself produce the precious metals, but imports them. Here the
amount of their cost is expressed by the quantity of commodities that must be
surrendered to foreign countries in order to obtain the supplementary quantity of
monetary metal in exchange. In a country that itself produces the precious metals,
the matter is the same in principle; all that is different is the way of reckoning the
loss of welfare through the sacrifice of the other branches of production and the
preference for mining the precious metals; it is perhaps less perceptible, but it is
just as comprehensible in theory. The measure of the additional harm done by the
diversion of metal to monetary uses is always given by the quantity of metal that is
withdrawn from other uses in favor of the monetary use.

III.17.4

Where fiat or credit money is employed, these reasons in favor of the extension of
clearing methods of payment and of the use of fiduciary media do not arise. The
only thing in their favor is that they would avoid an increase in the value of money;
although this consideration is decisive. Where they are employed, the principle of
establishing the national monetary apparatus and maintaining it in working order
with the minimum cost must be attained in another way. It must be an object of
policy, for example, to manufacture the paper notes with the minimum cost of
production. It is immediately obvious that nothing like the same quantitative
significance can be attributed to this problem as to that of decreasing the monetary
demand for precious metals. However great the care taken in producing the notes,

III.17.5

demand for precious metals. However great the care taken in producing the notes,
their cost of production could never be anything near so great as that of the
precious metals. If we take into further consideration the fact that the artistic
production of the notes also constitutes a precautionary measure against
counterfeiting, so that merely on this ground, economizing in this sphere is not
worth considering, it follows that the problem of diminishing the cost of the
circulatory apparatus when fiat or credit money is employed must be of an entirely
different nature from what it is when commodity money is employed.
2 The Fluctuations in the Demand for Money
In order to be able to make an accurate estimate of the bearing of clearing methods
of payment and of fiduciary media on the development of the demand for money, it
is necessary to be clear about the nature of variations in the demand for money.

III.17.6

Fluctuations in the demand for money, insofar as the objective conditions of its
development are concerned, are governed in all communities by the same law. An
extension of the procedure of exchange mediated by money increases the demand
for money; a decrease of indirect exchange, a return to exchange in natura,
decreases it. But even apart from variations in the extent of indirect exchange
which are insignificant nowadays, large variations in the demand for money occur
which are determined by factors of general economic development. Increase of
population, and progress in division of labor, together with the extension of
exchange which goes hand in hand with it, increase the demand for money of
individuals, and also therefore the demand for money of the community, which
consists merely in the sum of the demands for money of individuals. Decrease of
population and retrogression of the exchange economy, bring about a contraction in
it. These are the determinants of the big changes in the demand for money. Within
these large variations, it is possible to observe smaller periodical movements. Such
are in the first place brought about by commercial and industrial fluctuations, by
the alternation of boom and depression peculiar to modern economic life, by good
and bad business.*30 The crest and the trough of the wave always cover a period of
several years. But also within single years, quarters, months, and weeks, even
within single days, there are considerable fluctuations in the level of the demand
for money. The transactions involving the use of money are concentrated together
at particular points of time; and even where this is not the case, the demand for
money is differentiated by the practice on the part of buyers of settling their share
of transactions on particular dates. On the daily markets it may perhaps seldom
happen that the demand for money during the hours of the market is greater than
before or after The periodical rise and fall of the demand for money can be seen
much more clearly where transactions are concentrated in weekly, monthly and
annual markets. A similar effect results from the custom of not paying wages and
salaries daily, but weekly, monthly, or quarterly. Rents, interest, and repayment
installments, are as a rule paid on particular days. The accounts of the tailor , the
shoemaker, the butcher, the baker, the bookseller, the doctor, and so forth, are often
settled not daily but periodically. The tendency in all these arrangements is
enormously strengthened by the mercantile practice of establishing certain days as
days of settlement, or paydays. The middle and last days of the month have gained
a special significance in this connection, and among the last days of the month,
particularly the last day of the quarters. But, above all, the payments that have to be
made in a community during the year are concentrated in the autumn, the decisive
circumstance being that agriculture, for natural reasons, has its chief business
period in the autumn. All of these facts have been repeatedly and exhaustively
illustrated by statistics; nowadays they are the common property of all discussions
on the nature of banks and money. *31

III.17.7

3 The Elasticity of the System of Reciprocal Cancellation
It is usual to ascribe to the payment system elasticity that is said to be attained by
means of the credit system and the continual improvements in banking organization
and technique, the capacity of adjusting the available stock of money to the level of
the demand for money at any time without exerting any influence on the exchange
ratio between money and other economic goods. Between the volume of fiduciary
media and the bank transactions or private arrangements that can take the place of a
transfer of money, on the one hand, and the quantity of money, on the other hand,
there is said to be no fixed relationship which could make the former rigidly
dependent upon the latter. Instead of there being a fixed quantitative relationship
between money and its substitutes, that is to say, between the stock of money and
the various exchange and payment transactions, it is said that the organization of
banking institutions and the credit system has made commerce in the highest

III.17.8

banking institutions and the credit system has made commerce in the highest
degree independent of the quantity of money availa ble. The present-day
organization of the money, clearing, and credit system is said to have the tendency
to balance out variations in the quantity of money and render them ineffective, and
so to make prices as far as possible independent of the stock of money. *32 By others,
this adjusting capacity is ascribed only to fiduciary media, uncovered banknotes,*33
or unbacked deposits.*34
Before the soundness of these assertions can be tested, they must be brought out of
the obscurity that is due to a confusion between the effects of the clearing system
and those of the issue of fiduciary media. The two must be considered separately.

III.17.9

The reduction in the demand for money in the broader sense that results from the
practice of settling counterclaims by balancing them against each other is limited in
the first place by the number and amount of the claims and counterclaims falling
due on the same date. No greater number or amount of claims can be reciprocally
canceled between two parties than exist between them at the given moment. If,
instead of payment in money, claims on third persons are transferred which are
canceled by the transferee and the debtor by means of claims held by the latter
against the former, the sphere of the offsetting process can be extended. The
clearinghouses which nowadays exist in all important commercial centers are able
to avoid the technical and legal difficulties in the way of such transfers, and have
thus performed a quite extraordinary service in the extension of the system of
reciprocal cancellation. Nevertheless, the clearing system is still capable of further
improvement. Very many payments that could be settled by way of cancellation are
still made by the actual transfer of money.

III.17.10

If we imagine the clearing system fully developed, so that all payments are first
attempted to be settled by balancing, even those in everyday retail trade (which, for
practical reasons, would not appear to be easy of accomplishment), then we are
faced with a second limit to the extension of the clearing system, although this,
unlike the first, is not surmountable. Even if the community were in a stable
condition in which there were no variations in the relative incomes and wealth of
individuals and in the sizes of their reserves, complete reciprocal cancellation of all
the transfers of money that have to be made at a given moment would be possible,
only if the money received by individuals was spent again immediately and nobody
wanted to hold a sum of money in reserve against unforeseen and indefinite
expenditure. But since these assumptions do not hold good, and in fact never could
hold good, so long as money is in demand at all as a common medium of exchange,
it follows that there is a rigid maximum limit to the transactions that can be settled
through the clearing system. A community's demand for money in the broader
sense, even with the fullest possible development of the system of reciprocal
cancellation, cannot be forced below a minimum which will be determined
according to circumstances.

III.17.11

Now the degree in which a clearing system is actually developed within the limits
which the circumstances of the time allow for it, is in no way dependent upon the
ratio between the demand for money and the stock of money. A relative decline in
the one or the other can of itself exercise neither a direct nor an indirect influence
on the development of the clearing system. Such development is invariably due to
special causes. It is no more justifiable to assume that progressive extension of
settlement on the clearing principle reduces the demand for money precisely in the
degree in which the increasing development of commerce augments it, than to
suppose that the growth of the clearing system can never outstrip the increase in the

III.17.12

completely independent of one another. There is a connection between them only
insofar as deliberate attempts to counteract an increase in the exchange value of
money by reducing the demand of money through a better development of the
clearing system may be made with greater vigor during a period of rising prices;
assuming, of course, that the aim of currency policy is to prevent an increase in the
purchasing power of money. But this is no longer a case of an automatic
adjustment of the forces acting upon the objective exchange value of money, but
one of political experiments in influencing it, and the extent to which these
measures are accompanied by success remains a matter of doubt.
Thus it is easy to see what little justification there is for ascribing to the clearing
system the property, without affecting the objective exchange value of money, of
correcting the disparities that may arise between the stock of money and the
demand for it, and which could otherwise be eliminated only by suitable automatic
variations in the exchange ratio between money and other economic goods. The
development of the clearing system is independent of the other factors that
determine the ratio between the supply of money and the demand for it. The effect
on the demand for money of an expansion or contraction of the system of
reciprocal cancellation thus constitutes an independent phenomenon which is just
as likely to strengthen as to weaken the tendencies which for other reasons have an
influence in the market on the exchange ratio between money and commodities. It
seems self-evident that an increase in the number and size of payments cannot be
the sole determinant of the demand for money. Part of the new payments will be
settled by the clearing system; for this, too, ceteris paribus, will be extended in
such a way as thenceforward to be responsible for the settlement of the same
proportion of all payments as before. The rest of the payments could only be settled
by clearing processes if there was an extension of the clearing system beyond the
customary degree; but such an extension can never be called forth automatically by
an increase in the demand for money.

III.17.13

4 The Elasticity of a Credit Circulation Based on Bills, Especially on Commodity
Bills
The doctrine of the elasticity of fiduciary media, or more correctly expressed, of
their automatic adjustment at any given time to the demand for money in the
broader sense, stands in the very center of modern discussions of banking theory.
We have to show that this doctrine does not correspond to the facts, or at least not
in the form in which it is generally expounded and understood; and the proof of this
will at the same time refute one of the most important arguments of the opponents
of the quantity theory. *35

III.17.14

Tooke, Fullarton, Wilson, and their earlier English and German disciples, teach that
it does not lie in the power of the banks-of-issue to increase or diminish their note
circulation. They say that the quantity of notes in circulation is settled by the
demand within the community for media of payment. It the number and amount of
the payments are increasing, then, they say, the media of payment must also

III.17.15

making payments. Conversely, it is said, the only result of any attempt at an
arbitrary reduction of the note circulation of a bank is the immediate filling of the
gap by a competing bank; or, if this is not possible, as for instance because the
issue of notes is legally restricted, then commerce will create for itself other media
or circulation, such as bills, which will take the place of the notes.*36
It is in harmony with the views expounded by the Banking theorists on the essential
similarity of deposits and notes to apply what they say on this point about notes to
deposits also. It is in this sense that the doctrine of the elasticity of fiduciary media
is generally understood today;*37 it is in this sense alone that it is possible to defend
it even with only an appearance of justification. We may further suppose, as being
generally admitted, that it is not because of lack of public confidence in the issuing
bank that the fiduciary media are returned to it, whether in the form of notes
presented for conversion into cash or as demands for the withdrawal of deposits.
This assumption also agrees with the teachings of Tooke and his followers.

III.17.16

The fundamental error of the Banking School lies in its failure to understand the
nature of the issue of fiduciary media. When the bank discounts a bill or grants a
loan in some other way, it exchanges a present good for a future good. Since the
issuer creates the present good that it surrenders in the exchange—the fiduciary
media—practically out of nothing, it would only be possible to speak of a natural
limitation of the quantity of fiduciary media if the quantity of future goods that are
exchanged in the loan market against present goods was limited to a fixed amount.
But this is by no means the case. The quantity of future goods is indeed limited by
external circumstances, but not that of the future goods that are offered on the
market in the form of money. The issuers of the fiduciary media are able to induce
an extension of the demand for them by reducing the interest demanded to a rate
below the natural rate of interest, that is below that rate of interest that would be
established by supply and demand if the real capital were lent in natura without the
mediation of money,*38 whereas on the other hand the demand for fiduciary media
would be bound to cease entirely as soon as the rate asked by the bank was raised
above the natural rate. The demand for money and money substitutes that is
expressed on the loan market is in the last resort a demand for capital goods or,
when consumption credit is involved, for consumption goods. He who tries to
borrow "money" needs it solely for procuring other economic goods. Even if he
only wishes to supplement his reserve, he has no other object in this than to secure
the possibility of acquiring other goods in exchange at the given moment. The
same is true if he needs the money for making payments that have fallen due; in
this case it is the person receiving the payment who intends to purchase other
economic goods with the money received.

III.17.17

That demand for money and money substitutes which determines the exchange
ratio between money and other economic goods achieves expression only in the
behavior of individuals when buying and selling other economic goods. Only
when, say, money is being exchanged for bread is the position of the economic
goods, money and commodity, in the value scales of the individual parties to the
transaction worked out and used as a basis of action; and from this the precise
arithmetical exchange ratio is determined. But when what is demanded is a money
loan that is to be paid back in money again, then such considerations do not enter
into the matter. Then only the difference in value between present goods and future
goods is taken into account, and this alone has an influence on the determination of
the exchange ratio, that is, on the determination of the level of the rate of interest.

III.17.18

For this reason the Banking principle is unable to prove that no more fiduciary
media can be put into circulation than an amount determined by fixed
circumstances not dependent on the will of the issuer. It has therefore directed its

III.17.19

circumstances not dependent on the will of the issuer. It has therefore directed its
chief attention to the proof of the assertion that any superfluous quantity of
fiduciary media will be driven out of circulation back to the issuing body. Unlike
money, fiduciary media do not come on to the market as payments, but as loans,
Fullarton teaches; they must therefore automatically flow back to the bank when
the loan is repaid. *39 This is true. But Fullarton overlooks the possibility that the
debtor may procure the necessary quantity of fiduciary media for the repayment by
taking up a new loan.
Following up trains of thought that are already to be found in Fulla rton and the
other writers of his circle, and in support of certain institutions of the English and
Continental banking system, which, it must be said, have quite a different
significance in practice than that which is erroneously ascribed to them, the more
recent literature of banking theory has laid stress upon the significance of the shortterm commodity bill for the establishment of an elastic credit system. The system
by which payments are made could, it is said, be made capable of the most perfect
adjustment to the changing demands upon it, if it were brought into immediate
causal connection with the demand for media of payment. According to
Schumacher, that can only be done through banknotes, and has been done in
Germany by basing the banknotes on the commodity bills, the quantity of which
increases and decreases with the intensity of economic life. Through the channel of
the discounting business, in place of interest-bearing commodity bills (which have
only a limited capacity of circulation because their amounts are always different,
their validity of restricted duration, and their soundness dependent on the credit of
numerous private persons), banknotes are issued (which are put into circulation in
large quantifies by a well-known semipublic institution and always refer to the
same sums without limitation as to time, and therefore possess a much wider
capacity of circulation, comparable to that of metallic money). Then on the
redemption of the discounted bill an exchange in the contrary direction is said to
take place: the banknotes, or instead of them metallic money, flow back to the
bank, diminishing the quantity of media of payment in circulation. It is argued that
if money is correctly defined as a draft on a consideration for services rendered,
then a banknote based on an accepted commodity bill corresponds to this idea to
the fullest extent, since it closely unites the service and the consideration for it and
regularly disappears again out of circulation after it has negotiated the latter. It is
claimed that through such an organic connection between the issue of banknotes
and economic life, created by means of the commodity bill, the quantity of the
means of payment in circulation is automatically adjusted to variations in the need
for means for payment. And that the more completely this is attained, the more out
of the question is it that the money itself will experience the variations in value
affecting prices, and the more will the determination of prices be subject to the
supply and demand on the commodity market.*40

III.17.20

In the face of this, we must first of all ask how it is possible to justify the drawing
of a fundamental distinction between banknotes and other money substitutes,
between banknotes not covered by money and other fiduciary media. Deposits
which can be drawn upon at any time by check, apart from certain minor technical
and juristic details which make them unusable in retail trade and for certain other
payments, are just as good a money substitute as the banknote. It is a matter of
indifference from the economic point of view whether the bank discounts a bill by
paying out currency in notes or by a credit on a giro account. From the point of

III.17.21

A bill is only a form of promissory note with a special legal and commercial
qualification. No economic difference can be found between a claim in the form of
a bill and any other claim of equal goodness and identical time of maturity. And the
commodity bill, again, differs only juristically from an open book debt that has
come into being through a credit-purchase transaction. Thus it comes to the same
thing in the end whether we talk of the elasticity of the note circulation based on
commodity bills or of the elasticity of a circulation of fiduciary media resulting
from the cession of short-term claims arising out of credit sales.
Now the number and extent of purchases and sales on credit are by no means
independent of the credit policy followed by the banks, the issuers of fiduciary
media. If the conditions under which credit is granted are made more difficult, their
number must decrease; if the conditions are made easier, their number must
increase. When there is a delay in the payment of the purchase price, only those can
sell who do not need money immediately; but in this case bank credit would not be
requisitioned at all. Those, however, who want money immediately can only make
sales on credit if they have a prospect of immediately being able to turn into money
the claims which the transaction yields them. Other granters of credit can only
place just so many present goods at the disposal of the loan market as they possess;
but it is otherwise with the banks, which are able to procure additional present
goods by the issue of fiduciary media. They are in a position to satisfy all the
requests for credit that are made to them. But the extent of these requests depends
merely upon the price that they demand for granting the credit. If they demand less
than the natural rate of interest—and they must do this if they wish to do any
business at all with the new issue of fiduciary media; it must not be forgotten that
they are offering an additional supply of credit to the market—then these requests
will increase.

III.17.22

When the loans granted by the bank through the issue of fiduciary media fall due
for repayment, then it is true that a corresponding sum of fiduciary media returns to
the bank, and the quantity in circulation is diminished. But fresh loans are issued
by the bank at the same time and new fiduciary media flow into circulation. Of
course, those who hold the commodity-bill theory will object that a further issue of
fiduciary media can take place only if new commodity bills come into existence
and are presented for discounting. This is quite true. But whether new commodity
bills come into existence depends upon the credit policy of the banks.

III.17.23

Let us just picture to ourselves the life history of a commodity bill, or, more
correctly, of a chain of commodity bills. A cotton dealer has sold raw cotton to a

III.17.24

profits out of transactions that were only made possible through the granting of
credit on the part of the banks.
When we see that the quantity of the commodit y bills presented for discount
increases at certain times and decreases again at other times, we must not conclude
that these fluctuations are to be explained by variations in the demands for money
of individuals. The only admissible conclusion is that under the conditions made by
the banks at the time there is no greater number of people seeking credit. If the
banks-of-issue bring the rate of interest they charge in their creditor transactions
near to the natural rate of interest, then the demands upon them decrease; if they
reduce their rate of interest so that it falls lower than the natural rate of interest,
then these demands increase. The cause of fluctuations in the demand for the credit
of the banks-of-issue is to be sought nowhere else than in the credit policy they
follow.

III.17.25

By virtue of the power at their disposal of granting bank credit through the issue of
fiduciary media the banks are able to increase indefinitely the total quantity of
money and money substitutes in circulation. By issuing fiduciary media, they can
increase the stock of money in the broader sense in such a way that an increase in
the demand for money which otherwise would lead to an increase in the objective
value of money would have its effects on the determination of the value of money
nullified. They can, by limiting the granting of loans, so reduce the quantity of
money in the broader sense in circulation as to avoid a diminution of the objective
exchange value of money which would otherwise occur for some reason or other In
certain circumstances, as has been said, this may occur. But in all the mechanism of
the granting of bank credit and in the whole manner in which fiduciary media are
created and return again to the place whence they were issued, there is nothing
which must necessarily lead to such a result. It may quite as well happen, for
instance, that the banks increase the issue of fiduciary media at the very moment
when a reduction in the demand for money in the broader sense or an increase in
the stock of money in the narrower sense is leading to a reduction of the objective
exchange value of money; and their intervention will strengthen the existing
tendency to a variation in the value of money. The circulation of fiduciary media is
in fact not elastic in the sense that it automatically accommodates the demand for
money to the stock of money without influencing the objective exchange value of
money, as is erroneously asserted. It is only elastic in the sense that it allows of any
sort of extension of the circulation, even completely unlimited extension, just as it
allows of any sort of restriction. The quantity of fiduciary media in circulation has
no natural limits. If for any reason it is desired that it should be limited, then it must
be limited by some sort of deliberate human intervention—that is by banking
policy.

III.17.26

Of course, all of this is true only under the assumption that all banks issue fiduciary
media according to uniform principles, or that there is only one bank that issues
fiduciary media. A single bank carrying on its business in competition with
numerous others is not in a position to enter upon an independent discount policy.
If regard to the behavior of its competitors prevents it from further reducing the rate
of interest in bank-credit transactions, then—apart from an extension of its
clientele —it will be able to circulate more fiduciary media only if there is a
demand for them even when the rate of interest charged is not lower than that
charged by the banks competing with it. Thus the banks may be seen to pay a
certain amount of regard to the periodical fluctuations in the demand for money.

III.17.27

stabilize the objective exchange value of money. To this extent, therefore, the
theory of the elasticity of the circulation of fiduciary media is correct; it has rightly
apprehended one of the phenomena of the market, even if it has also completely
misapprehended its cause. And just because it has employed a false principle for
explaining the phenomenon that it has observed, it has also completely closed the
way to understanding of a second tendency of the market, that emanates from the
circulation of fiduciary media. It was possible for it to overlook the tact that so far
as the banks proceed uniformly, there must be a continual augmentation of the
circulation of fiduciary media, and consequently a fall of the objective exchange
value of money.
5 The Significance of the Exclusive Employment of Bills as Cover for Fiduciary
Media
The German Bank Act of March 14, 1875, required that the notes issued in excess
of the gold cover should be covered by bills of exchange; but in practice this
provision has been understood to refer only to commodity bills. The significance of
this prescription differs from that popularly attributed to it. It does not make the
note issue elastic; it does not even bring it, as is erroneously believed, into an
organic connection with the conditions of demand for money; these are all
illusions, which should long ago have been destroyed. Nei ther has it the
significance for maintaining the possibility of conversion of the notes that is
ascribed to it; this will have to be referred to in greater detail later.

III.17.28

The limitation of the note issue not covered by metal, that is of fiduciary media in
the form of banknotes, is the fundamental principle of the German act, which is
based upon Peel's Act. And among the numerous and multiform obstacles that have
been set up with this aim, the strict provision concerning the investment of the
assets backing the note issue takes a not altogether unimportant place. That these
must consist not merely in claims, but in claims in the form of bills; that the bills
must have at the most three months to run; that they should bear the names,
preferably of three, but at least of two, parties known to be solvent—all these
conditions limit the note issue. At the very beginning, a considerable part of the
national credit is kept away from the banks. A similar effect results from the further
limitation of the note cover merely to commodity bills, as was undoubtedly
intended by the legislature even though express provision for it was omitted from
the Bank Act, probably because of the impossibility of giving a legal definition of
the concept of a commodity bill. That this limitation did in fact amount to a
restriction of the issue of fiduciary media is best shown by the fact that when the
Bank Act was passed the number of commodity bills was already limited, and that
since then, in spite of a considerable increase in the demand for credit, their number
has decreased to such an extent that the Reichsbank meets with difficulties when it
attempts to select such bills only for purposes of investing without decreasing the
amount of credit granted. *41

III.17.29

6 The Periodical Rise and Fall in the Extent to Which Bank Credit Is
Requisitioned
The requests made to the banks are requests, not for the transfer of money, but for
the transfer of other economic goods. Would-be borrowers are in search of capital,
not money. They are in search of capital in the form of money, because nothing
other than power of disposal over money can offer them the possibility of being
able to acquire in the market the real capital which is what they really want. Now
the peculiar thing, which has been the source of one of the most difficult puzzles in
economics for more than a hundred years, is that the would-be borrower's demand
for capital is satisfied by the banks through the issue of money substitutes. It is

III.17.30

for capital is satisfied by the banks through the issue of money substitutes. It is
clear that this can only provide a provisional satisfaction of the demands for capital.
The banks cannot evoke capital out of nothing. If the fiduciary media satisfy the
desire for capital, that is if they really procure disposition over capital goods for the
borrowers, then we must first seek the source from which this supply of capital
comes. It will not be particularly difficult to discover it. If the fiduciary media are
perfect substitutes for money and do all that money could do, if they add to the
social stock of money in the broader sense, then their issue must be accompanied
by appropriate effects on the exchange ratio between money and other economic
goods. The cost of creating capital for borrowers of loans granted in fiduciary
media is borne by those who are injured by the consequent variation in the
objective exchange value of money; but the profit of the whole transaction goes not
only to the borrowers, but also to those who issue the fiduciary media, although
these admittedly have sometimes to share their gains with other economic agents,
as when they hold interest-bearing deposits, or the state shares in their profits.
The entrepreneurs who approach banks for loans are suffering from shortage of
capital; it is never shortage of money in the proper sense of the word that drives
them to present their bills for discounting. In some circumstances this shortage of
capital may be only temporary; in other circumstances it may be permanent. In the
case of the many undertakings which constantly draw upon short-term bank credit,
year in, year out, the shortage of capital is a permanent one.

III.17.31

For the problem with which we are concerned, the circumstances causing the
shortage of capital on the part of entrepreneurs do not matter. We may even
provisionally disregard, as of minor importance, the question whether the shortage
is one of investment capital or working capital. Sometimes the view is propounded
that it is unjustified to procure investment capital partly by way of bank credit
although this is less undesirable as a way of procuring work ing capital. Such
arguments as these have played an important part in recent discussions of banking
policy. The banks have been adversely criticized on the ground of their havin g used
a considerable part of the credit issued by them for granting loans to industrial
enterprises in search not of fixed but of working capital and of having thus
endangered their liquidity. Legislation has been demanded to limit to liquid
investments only the assets backing the liabilities arising from the issue of
fiduciary media. Provisions of this sort are designed to deal with fiduciary media in
the form of deposits in the same way as the note issue has been dealt with under the
influence of the doctrines of the Currency School. We have already commented on
their significance and have shown, as further discussion will remind us, that the
only practical value of these, as of all similar restrictions, lies in the obstacles they
oppose to unlimited expansion of credit.

III.17.32

The cash reserve which is maintained by every business enterprise also is a part of
its working capital. If an enterprise feels for any reason obliged to increase its
reserve this must be regarded as an increase of its capital. If it requisitions credit for
this purpose, its action cannot be regarded as any different from a demand for
credit that arises from any other cause—say, on account of an extension of plant or
the like.

III.17.33

But attention must now be drawn to a phenomenon which, even if it adds nothing
new to what has been said already, may serve to set some important processes of
the money-and-capital market in a clearer light. It has been repeatedly mentioned
already that commercial practice concentrates all kinds of settlements on particular
days of the year so that there is bound to be a bigger demand for money on these
days than on others. The concentration of days of settlement at the end of the week,
the fortnight, the month, and the quarter, is a factor which considerably increases

III.17.34

the fortnight, the month, and the quarter, is a factor which considerably increases
the demand for money, and so of course the demand for capital, on the part of
undertakings. Even though an entrepreneur could reckon safely on sufficient
receipts on a given day to meet the obligations falling due on that or the following
day, still it would only be in the rarest cases that he could use the former directly
for paying the latter. The technique of payment is not so far developed that it would
always be possible to fulfill obligations punctually without having secured some
days beforehand free disposal over the necessary means. A person who has to
redeem a bill that falls due at his bank on September 30 will usually have to take
steps, before that date, for covering it; sums which do not reach him until the very
day of maturity of the bill will mostly prove useless for this purpose. In any case it
is completely impracticable to use the receipts on any given day for making
payments that fall due on the same day at distant places. On the days of settlement
there must therefore necessarily be an increased demand for money on the part of
the individual undertaking, and this will disappear again just as quickly as it arose.
Of course, this demand for money too is a demand for capital. Hypercritical
theorists, following Mercantile usage, are accustomed to draw a subtle distinction
between the demand for money and the demand for capital; they contrast the
demand for short-term credit, as a demand for money, with the demand for longterm credit, as a demand for capital. There si little reason for retaining this
terminology, which has been responsible for much confusion. What is here called
the demand for money is nothing but a real demand for capital; this must never be
forgotten. If the undertaking takes up a short-term loan to supplement its cash
reserve, then the case is one of a genuine credit transaction, of an exchange of
future goods for present goods.
The increased demand of the entrepreneur for money and consequently for capital
which occurs on these days of settlement, expresses itself in an increase of the
requests for loans that are made to credit-issuing banks. In those countries where
notes and not deposits are the chief kind of fiduciary media, this is perceptible in an
increase in the quantity of bills handed in at the banks-of-issue for discounting and,
if these bills are actually discounted, in the quantity of notes in circulation. *42 Now
this regular rise and fall of the level of the note circulation round about the days of
settlement can in no way be explained by an increase in the total quantity of bills in
existence in the community. No new bills, particularly no new short-term bills, are
drawn and handed in to the banks to be discounted. It is bills that have the normal
period to run, that are negotiated shortly before maturity. Until then they are
retained in the portfolios either of nonbankers or of banks whose issue of fiduciary
media is limited, whether because they have a small clientele or because of legal
obstacles. It is not until the demand for money increases that the bills reach the
large banks-of-issue. It is clear how little justification there is for the assertion that
the amount of the note issue of central European banks-of-issue is organically
connected with the quantity of bills drawn in the community. Only some of the
bills are discounted at the banks by the issue of fiduciary media; the others
complete their term without calling bank credit into use. But the proportion
between the two amounts depends entirely on the credit policy that the creditissuing banks follow.

III.17.35

Bank legislation has taken particular account of the extraordinary increase in the
demand for money round about quarter-day. Article two of the German Bank
(Amendment) Act of June 1, 1909, extends the usual tax-free quota of notes of 550
million marks to 750 million marks for the tax accounts based on information
concerning the last days of March, June, September, and December in each year,
thus sanctioning a procedure that the banks had been in the habit of following for
decades. On every day of settlement, the entrepreneur's demand for credit

III.17.36

decades. On every day of settlement, the entrepreneur's demand for credit
increases, and therefore the natural rate of interest also. But the credit-issuing banks
have endeavored to counteract the increase in interest on loans either by not raising
the rate of discount at all, or by not raising it to an extent corresponding to the
increase in the natural rate of interest. Of course, the consequence of this has
necessarily been to swell their circulation of fiduciary media. State banking policy
has in general put no obstacles in the way of this practice of the banks, which
undoubtedly helps to stabilize the objective exchange value of money. The German
Bank Act of 1909 was the first which took steps to give it direct support.
7 The Influence of Fiduciary Media on Fluctuations in the Objective Exchange
Value of Money
Thus there is no such thing as an automatic adjustment of the quantity of fiduciary
media in circulation to fluctuations in the de mand for money without an effect on
the objective exchange value of money. Consequently all those arguments are ill
founded which seek to deny practical significance to the quantity theory by
reference to the alle ged elasticity of the circulation of money. The increase and
decrease of the stock of fiduciary media in a free banking system have no greater
natural connection, direct or indirect, with the rise and fall of the demand for
money in the broader sense, than the increase and decrease of the stock of money
have with the rise and fall of the demand for money in the narrower sense. Such a
connection exists only insofar as the credit banks deliberately try to bring it about.
Apart from this, the only connection that can be established between the two sets of
variations, which are in themselves independent of each other, is like that of the
policy which, say, in a period of increasing demand for money in the broader sense
aims at an increase of fiduciary media in order to counteract the rise in the
objective exchange value of money which might otherwise be expected. Since it is
impossible to measure fluctuations in the objective exchange value of money, even
only approximately, we are not able to judge whether the increase of fiduciary
media that has occurred during the last century in nearly all the countries of the
world has together with the increase in the quantity of money kept pace with the
increase in the demand for money in the broader sense, or fallen behind it, or
outstripped it. All that we can be sure of is that at least a part of the increase in the
demand for money in the broader sense has been robbed of its influence on the
purchasing power of money by the increase in the quantity of money and fiduciary
media in circulation.

CHAPTER 18

III.18.1

The Redemption of Fiduciary Media
1 The Necessity for Complete Equivalence Between Money and Money
Substitutes
There is nothing remarkable in the fact that money substitutes, as completely liquid
claims to money against persons whose capacity to pay is beyond all doubt, have a
value as great as the sums of money to which they refer Admittedly, the question
does arise: Are there any persons whose capacity to pay is so completely certain as
to be quite beyond all doubt? And it may be pointed out that more than one bank,
whose solvency nobody had dared to call in question even the day before, has
collapsed ignominiously; and that so long as the remembrance of events of this sort
has not entirely vanished from human memory, it must evoke at least a small
difference between the valuation of money and that of claims to money payable at
any time, even if, as far as human foresight goes, these latter are to be regarded as
completely sound.

III.18.2

It is undeniable that such questions reveal a possible source of a certain lack of
confidence in notes and checks, which would necessarily result in money
substitutes having a lower value than money. But, on the other hand, there are
reasons which might cause individuals to value money substitutes more highly than
money, even if demands for the conversion of money into money substitutes were
not always satisfied immediately. We shall have to speak of this later. Furthermore,
quite apart from all these circumstances, it should be clearly pointed out that doubts
as to the quality of fiduciary media are hardly tenable nowadays. In the case of
money substitutes of medium and small denominations, among which token coins
occupy the most important place, doubts of this nature do not come into
consideration at all. But in the case also of the money substitutes that are used to
meet the requirements of large-scale business, the possibility of loss is as good as
nonexistent under present conditions; at least the possibility of loss is no greater in
connection with the money substitutes issued by the large central banks than is the
danger of demonetization that threatens the holders of any particular kind of
money.

III.18.3

Now the complete equivalence of sums of money and secure claims to immediate
payment of the same sums gives rise to a consequence that has extremely important
bearings on the whole monetary system; namely, the possibility of tendering or
accepting claims of this sort wherever money might be tendered or accepted.
Exchanges are made through the medium of money; this fact remains unaltered.
Buyers buy with money, and sellers sell for it. But exchanges are not always made
by the transfer of a sum of money. They may also be made by the transfer or
assignment of a claim to money. Now claims to money which fulfill the conditions
mentioned above pass from hand to hand without those who acquire them feeling
any need for actually enforcing them. They completely perform all the functions of
money. Why then should the bidders burden themselves with the trouble of
redeeming them? The claim which has been set in circulation remains in
circulation, and becomes a money substitute. So long as confidence in the
soundness of the bank is unshaken, and so long as the bank does not issue more
money substitutes than its customers require for their dealings with one another
(and everybody is to be regarded as a customer of the bank who accepts its money
substitutes in place of money), then the situation in which the right behind the
money substitute is enforced by presentation of notes for redemption or by
withdrawal of deposits simply does not arise. The bank-of-issue may therefore

III.18.4

withdrawal of deposits simply does not arise. The bank-of-issue may therefore
assume that its money substitutes will remain in circulation until the necessity of
dealing with persons outside the circle of customers forces holders to redeem them.
This, in fact, is the very thing which enables the bank to issue fiduciary media at
all, that is, to put money substitutes in circulation without maintaining in readiness
the sum that would be necessary to keep the promise of immediate conversion that
they represent.
The body which issues the fiduciary media and is responsible for maintaining their
equivalence with the sums of money to which they refer must nevertheless be able
to redeem promptly those fiduciary media which their holders present for
conversion into money when they have to make payments to persons who do not
recognize these fiduciary media as money substitutes. This is the only way in
which a difference between the value of money on the one hand and of the notes
and deposits on the other hand can be prevented from coming into existence.

III.18.5

2 The Return of Fiduciary Media to the Issuer on Account of Lack of
Confidence on the Part of the Holders
The view has sometimes been expressed that if an issuing body wishes to secure
equivalence between its fiduciary media and the money to which they refer, it
should take precautions so as to be able to redeem those fiduciary media that are
returned to it through lack of confidence on the part of the holders. It is impossible
to subscribe to this view; for it completely fails to recognize the significance and
object of a conversion fund. It cannot be the function of a conversion fund to
enable the issuing body to redeem its fiduciary media when its counters are
besieged by holders who have lost confidence in them. Confidence in the capacity
of circulation of fiduciary media is not an individual phenomenon; either it is
shared by everybody or it does not exist at all. Fiduciary media can fulfill their
function only on the condition that they are fully equivalent to the sums of money
to which they refer. They cease to be equivalent to these sums of money as soon as
confidence in the issuer is shaken even if only among a part of the community. The
yokel who presents his note for redemption in order to convince himself of the
bank's capacity to pay, which nobody else doubts, is only a comic figure that the
bank has no need to fear It need not make any special arrangements or take any
special precautions on his account. But any bank that issues fiduciary media is
forced to suspend payments if everybody begins to present notes for redemption or
to withdraw deposits. Any such bank is powerless against a panic; no system and
no policy can help it then. This follows necessarily from the very nature of
fiduciary media, which imposes upon those who issue them the obligation to pay a
sum of money which they cannot command. *43

III.18.6

The history of the last two centuries contains more than one example of such
catastrophes. Those banks that have succumbed to the onslaughts of noteholders
and depositors have been reproached with bringing about the collapse by granting
credit imprudently, by tying up their capital, or by advancing loans to the state;
extremely serious charges have been brought against their directors. Where the
state itself has been the issuer of the fiduciary media, the impossibility of
maintaining their redeemability has usually been ascribed to their having been
issued in defiance of precepts based on banking experience. It is obvious that this
attitude is due to a misunderstanding. Even if the banks had put all their assets in

III.18.7

Thus there lies an irresolvable contradiction in the nature of fiduciary media. Their
equivalence to money depends on the promise that they will at any time be
converted into money at the demand of the person entitled to them and on the fact
that proper precautions are taken to make this promise effective. But—and this is
likewise involved in the nature of fiduciary media —what is promised is an
impossibility insofar as the bank is never able to keep its loans perfectly liquid.
Whether the fiduciary media are issued in the course of banking operations or not,
immediate redemption is always impracticable if the confidence of the holders has
been lost.
3 The Case Against the Issue of Fiduciary Media
Recognition of the fact, which had been pointed out before the time of Ricardo, that
there is no way in which an issuer of fiduciary media can protect itself against the
consequences of a panic or avoid succumbing to any serious run, may lead, if one
likes, to a demand that the creation of fiduciary media should be prohibited. Many
writers have adopted this attitude. Some have demanded the prohibition of the issue
of such notes as have no metal backing; others, the prohibition of all clearing
transactions except with full metallic cover; others again, and this is the only
logical position, have combined both demands.*44

III.18.8

Such demands as these have not been fulfilled. The progressive extension of the
money economy would have led to an enormous extension in the demand for
money if its efficiency had not been extraordinarily increased by the creation of
fiduciary media. The issue of fiduciary media has made it possible to avoid the
convulsions that would be involved in an increase in the objective exchange value
of money, and reduced the cost of the monetary apparatus. Fiduciary media tap a
lucrative source of revenue for their issuer; they enrich both the person that issues
them and the community that employs them. In the early days of the modern
banking system they played a further part still by strengthening the creditnegotiating activities of the banks (which in those times could hardly have proved
profitable if carried on for their own sake alone) and so brought the system safely
past those obstacles which obstructed its beginnings.

III.18.9

Prohibition of the issue of all notes except those with a full backing and of the
lending of the deposits which serve as the basis of the check-and-clearing business
would mean almost completely suppressing the note issue and almost strangling the
check-and-clearing system. If notes are still to be issued and accounts opened in
spite of such a prohibition, then somebody must be found who is prepared to bear
unrecompensed the costs involved. Only very rarely will this be the issuer,
although occasionally such a thing happens. The United States created silver
certificates in order to relieve the business world of the inconveniences of the
clumsy silver coinage and to remove one of the obstacles in the way of an extended
use of the silver dollar, which it was thought desirable to encourage for reasons of
currency policy. Similarly for reasons of currency policy, gold certificates were
created, so as to bring gold money into use despite the public preference for
paper.*45

III.18.10

Sometimes the public may be willing to use notes, checks, or giro transfers for
technical reasons, even if it has to make a certain payment to the bank for the
facility. There are sometimes objections to the physical use of coins, which are not
involved in the transfer of claims to deposited sums of money. The storage of
considerable sums of money and their insurance against risk from fire and flood
and from robbery and theft are not always a small matter even for the individual
merchant, and still less so for the private person. Warrants payable to order and
checkbooks whose folios have no significance until they have been signed by an

III.18.11

checkbooks whose folios have no significance until they have been signed by an
authorized person are less liable to dishonest handling than are coins, whose
smooth faces tell no tales of the methods by which they have been acquired. But
even banknotes, which retain no relationships to individuals, are yet easier to
preserve against destruction and to secure against depredation than are bulky pieces
of metal. It is true that the large accumulations of money deposited in the banks
constitute all the more profitable and therefore attractive an objective for criminal
enterprise; but in their case it is possible to take such precautionary measures as
will afford almost complete safety, and it is similarly easier to safeguard such large
deposits against the risk of accidental damage by the elements. It has proved a
more difficult matter to withdraw the coffers of the banks from the grasp of those
in political power; but even this has eventually been achieved, and such coups de
main as those of the Stuarts or Davousts have not been repeated in modern times.
A further motive for the introduction of payment through the mediation of the
banks has been provided by the difficulty of determining the weight and fineness of
coins in the ordinary course of daily business. In this way debasement of the
coinage led to the establishment of the famous banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg.
The commission of one-fortieth percent which the customers of the Bank of
Amsterdam had to pay on each deposit or withdrawal*46 was far outweighed by the
advantages offered by the trustworthiness of the bank currency. Finally; the saving
of costs of transport and the greater handiness are other advantages of banking
methods of payment that have similarly entered into consideration, especially in
countries with a silver, or even a copper, standard. Thus in Japan as early as the
middle of the fourteenth century, certain notes issued by rich merchants were in
great demand because they offered a means of avoiding the costs and
inconveniences involved in the transport of the heavy copper coinage.*47 The
premium at which banknotes sometimes stood as against metallic currency before
the development of the interlocal check-and-clearing business and the post-officeorder service can most easily be explained along these lines.*48

III.18.12

It is clear that prohibition of fiduciary media would by no means imply a death
sentence for the banking system, as is sometimes asserted. The banks would still
retain the business of negotiating credit, of borrowing for the purpose of lending.
Not consideration for the banks, but appreciation of the influence of fiduciary
media on the objective exchange value of money; is the reason why they have not
been suppressed.

III.18.13

4 The Redemption Fund
A person who holds money substitutes and wishes to transact business with persons
to whom these money substitutes are unfamiliar and therefore unacceptable in lieu
of money is obliged to change the money substitutes into money. He goes to the
body that is responsible for maintaining equivalence between the money substitutes
and money and proceeds to enforce the claim that the money substitutes embody.

III.18.14

substitutes, and if these money substitutes have an unlimited capacity of
circulation, then there are no limits to the extension of the issue of fiduciary media.
The case would be the same if all the banks had a common understanding as to the
issue of their money substitutes and extended the circulation of them according to
uniform principles.)
Thus, in the circumstances assumed, it is not possible for a bank to issue more
money substitutes than its customers can use; everything in excess of this must
flow back to it. There is no danger in this so long as the excess issue is one of
money certificates; but an excess issue of fiduciary media is catastrophic.

III.18.15

Consequently the chief rule to be observed in the business of a credit-issuing bank
is quite clear and simple: it must never issue more fiduciary media than will meet
the requirements of its customers for their business with each other. But it must be
admitted that there are unusually big difficulties in the practical application of this
maxim for there is no way of determining the extent of these requirements on the
part of customers. In the absence of any exact knowledge on this point the bank has
to rely upon an uncertain empirical procedure which may easily lead to mistakes.
Nevertheless, prudent and experienced bank directors—and most bank directors are
prudent and experienced—usually manage pretty well with it.

III.18.16

It is only exceptionally that the clienteles of the credit-issuing banks as such extend
beyond political boundaries. Even those banks that have branches in different
countries give complete independence to their individual branches in the issue of
money substitutes. Under present political conditions, uniform administration of
banking firms domiciled in different countries would hardly be possible; and
difficulties of banking technique and legislation, and finally difficulties of currency
technique, stand in the way also. Furthermore, within individual countries it is
usually possible to distinguish two categories of credit banks. On the one hand
there is a privileged bank, which possesses a monopoly or almost a monopoly of
the note issue, and whose antiquity and financial resources, and still more its
extraordinary reputation throughout the whole country, give it a unique position.
And on the other hand there is a series of rival banks, which have not the right of
issue and which, however great their reputation and the confidence in their
solvency, are unable to compete in the capacity for circulation of their money
substitutes with the privileged bank, behind which stands the state with all its
authority. Different princ iples apply to the policies of the two kinds of bank. For
the banks of the second group, it is sufficient if they keep in readiness for the
redemption of those money substitutes which are returned to them a certain sum of
such assets as will enable them to command on demand the credit of the central
bank. They extend the circulation of their fiduciary media as far as possible. If in so
doing they exceed the issue that their customers can absorb, so that some of their
fiduciary media are presented for redemption, then they procure from the central
bank the necessary resources for this by rediscounting bills from their portfolio, or
by pledging securities. Thus the essence of the policy that they must pursue to
maintain their position as credit-issuing banks consists in always maintaining a
sufficiently large quantity of such assets as the central bank regards as an adequate
basis for granting credit.

III.18.17

The central banks have no such support from a more powerful and distinguished
institution. They are thrown entirely upon their own resources, and must shape
their policy accordingly. If they have put too many money substitutes into
circulation so that holders apply for their redemption, then they have no other way
out than that provided by their redemption fund. Consequently, it is nec essary for
them to see that there are never more of their fiduciary media in circulation than
will meet the requirements of their customers. As has already been said, it is not

III.18.18

will meet the requirements of their customers. As has already been said, it is not
possible to make a direct evaluation of these requirements. Only an indirect
evaluation is practicable. The proportion of the total demand for money in the
broader sense that cannot be satisfied by fiduciary media must be determined. This
will be the quantity of money that is necessary for doing business with the persons
who are not customers of the central bank; that is, the quantity required for
purposes of foreign trade.
The demand for money for international trade is composed of two different
elements. It consists, first, of the demand for those sums of money which, as a
result of variations in the relative extent and intensity of the demand for money in
different countries, are transported from one country to another until that position
of equilibrium is reestablished in which the objective exchange value of money has
the same level everywhere. It is impossible to avoid the transfers of money that are
necessary on this account. It is true that we might imagine the establishment of an
international deposit bank in which large sums of money were deposited, perhaps
even all the money in the world, and made the basis of an issue of money
certificates, that is, of notes or balances completely backed by money. This well
might put a stop to the physical use of coins, and might in certain circumstances
tend to a considerable reduction of costs; instead of coins being used, notes would
be sent or transfers made in the books of the bank. But such external differences
would not affect the nature of the process.

III.18.19

The other motive for international transfers of money is provided by those balances
that arise in the international exchange of commodities and services. These have to
be settled by transfers in opposite directions, and it is therefore theoretically
possible to eliminate them completely by developing the clearing process.

III.18.20

In foreign-exchange dealings and the related transactions that in recent times have
been united with them, there is a fine mechanism which cancels out nearly all such
transfers of money. It is only exceptionally nowadays that two ships meet at sea,
one of them taking gold from London to New York and the other bringing gold
from New York to London. International transfers of money are controlled as a rule
merely by variations in the ratio between the de mand for money and the stock of
money. Among these variations, those with the greatest practical importance are
those which distribute the newly mined precious metals throughout the world, a
process in which London often plays the part of a middleman. Apart from this, and
provided that no extraordinary cause suddenly alters the relative demand for money
in different countries, the transference of money from country to country cannot be
particularly extensive. It may be assumed that, as a rule, the variations that occur in
this way are not so great as those variations in stocks of money that are due to new
production, or at least that they do not exceed them by very much. If this is true—
and it is supported only by rough estimates—then the movements which are
necessary for bringing the purchasing power of money to a common level will
consist largely or entirely of variations in the distribution of the additional quantity
of money only.

III.18.21

It is possible to estimate on empirical grounds that the relative demand for money
in a country, that is, the extent and intensity of its demand for money in relation to
the extent and intensity of the demand for money in other countries (this phrase
being interpreted throughout in the broader sense), will not decrease within a
relatively short period to such an extent as to cause the quantity of money and
fiduciary media together in circulation to sink below such and such a fraction of its
present amount. Of course, such estimates are necessarily based upon more or less
arbitrary combinations of factors and it is obviously never out of the question that
they will be subsequently upset by unforeseen events. But if the amount is

III.18.22

they will be subsequently upset by unforeseen events. But if the amount is
estimated very conservatively, and if due account is also taken of the fact that the
state of international trade may necessitate transfers of money from country to
country if only temporarily, then, so long as the quantity of fiduciary media
circulating within the country is not increased beyond the estimated amount and no
money certific ates are issued either, the accumulation of a redemption fund might
prove altogether unnecessary. For so long as the issue of fiduciary media does not
exceed this limit, and assuming of course the correctness of the estimate on which
it is based, there can arise no demand for redemption of the fiduciary media. If, for
example, the quantity of the banknotes, treasury notes, token coins, and deposits at
present in circulation in Germany were reduced by the sum deposited as cover for it
in the vaults of the banks, the money and credit system would not be changed in
any way. Germany's power to transact business through the medium of money with
foreign countries would not be affected.*49 It is only the notes, deposits, and so
forth, that are not covered by money that have the character of fiduciary media; it is
these only and not those covered by money that have the effects on the
determination of prices which it is the task of this part of our book to describe.
If the amount of fiduciary media in circulation were kept at a level below the limit
set by the presumable maximum requirements of foreign trade, then it would be
possible to do without a redemption reserve altogether, if it were not for a further
circumstance that enters into the question. This circumstance is the following: if
persons who needed a sum of money for foreign payments and were obliged to
obtain it by the exchange of money substitutes could do this only through
numerous money-changing transactions, perhaps involving an expenditure of time
and trouble so that the procedure cost them something, this would militate against
the complete equivalence of money substitutes and money, causing the former to
circulate at a discount. Hence, if only on this account, a redemption fund of a
certain amount would have to be maintained, even though the quantity of money
actually in circulation was enough for trade with foreign countries. It follows from
this that the fully backed note and the fully covered deposit, originally necessary in
order to accustom the public to the use of these forms of money substitute, have
still to be retained nowadays along with the superficially similar but essentially
different fiduciary medium. A note or deposit currency with no money backing at
all, that is, one which consists entirely of fiduciary media, still remains a practical
impossibility.

III.18.23

If we look at the redemption funds of the self-sufficing banks, we shall observe in
them an apparently quite irregular multifariousness. We shall observe that the kind
and amount of cover of the money substitutes, especially those issued in note form,
are regulated by a series of rules, constructed on quite different lines, partly by
mercantile usage and partly by legislation. It is hardly correct to speak of different
systems in this connection; that ambitious designation is little suited to empirical
rules that have for the most part been founded on erroneous views of the nature of
money and fiduciary media. There is, however, one idea that is expressed in all of
them; the idea that the issue of fiduciary media needs to be limited by some kind of
artificial restriction since it has no natural limits. Thus the question underlying all
monetary policy, whether an unlimited increase of fiduciary media with its
ineluctable consequence of a diminution in the objective exchange value of money
is a thing to be encouraged, is implicitly answered in the negative.

III.18.24

Recognition of the need for an artificial limitation of the circulation of fiduciary
media is, both on strictly scientific grounds and also on grounds of practical
expediency, a product of economic inquiry during the first half of the nineteenth
century. Its triumph over other views ended decades of such lively discussion as
our science has seldom known, and at the same time concluded a period of

III.18.25

our science has seldom known, and at the same time concluded a period of
uncertain experiment in the issuing of fiduciary media. During the years that have
since elapsed, the grounds on which it was based have been subjected to criticism,
sometimes ill founded, sometimes founded upon real objections. But the principle
of limiting the issue of uncovered notes has not been abandoned in banking
legislation. Nowadays it still constitutes an essential element in the banking policy
of civilized nations, even if the circumstance that the limitation only applies to the
issue of fiduciary media in the form of notes and not to the constantly growing
issue in the form of deposits may make its practical importance less than it was
some decades ago.
Limitation of fiduciary media also forms part of the money and credit system in
India, the Philippines, and those countries that have imitated them, although in a
different garb. No direct numerical proportion has been set up between the
redemption fund administered by the government and the quantity of fiduciary
media in circulation; any attempt to do this would have met with technical
difficulties if only because it was impossible to calculate exactly what the quantity
of fiduciary media was at the time of the transition to the new standard. But the
further issue of fiduciary media in the form of legal-tender coinage is reserved to
the state (it mostly requires special legislation) in a similar fashion to that in which
the issue of token coinage and the like is regulated elsewhere.

III.18.26

5 The So-called Banking Type of Cover for Fiduciary Media
The expressions solvency and liquidity are not always used correctly when they are
applied to the circumstances of a bank. They are sometimes regarded as
synonymous; but orthodox opinion understands them to refer to two different
states. (It must be admitted that a clear definition and distinction of the two
concepts is usually not attempted.)

III.18.27

A bank may be said to be solvent when its assets are so constituted that a
liquidation would necessarily result at least in complete satisfaction of all of its
creditors. Liquidity is that condition of the bank's assets which will enable it to
meet all its liabilities, not merely in full, but also in time, that is, without being
obliged to ask for anything in the nature of a moratorium from its creditors.
Liquidity is a particular sort of solvency. Every enterprise—for the same is true of
any body that participates in credit transactions—that is liquid is also solvent; but
on the other hand not every undertaking that is solvent is also liquid. A person who
cannot settle a debt on the day when it falls due has not a liquid status, even if there
is no doubt that he will be able in three or six months' time to pay the debt together
with interest and the other costs in which the delay is meanwhile involving the
creditor.

III.18.28

Since ancient times commercial law has imposed on everybody the obligation to
have regard to liquidity throughout the whole conduct of his business. This
requirement is characteristically expressed in mercantile life. Anyone who has to
approach his creditor for permission to defer the payment of a debt, anyone who
allows matters to reach the point of having his bills protested, has imperiled his
business reputation, even if he is afterward able to meet all his outstanding
obligations in full. All undertakings are subject to the rule that we have already
encountered as the business principle of the credit-negotiating banks, that steps
must be taken to permit the full and punctual settlement of every claim as it falls
due.*50

III.18.29

For credit-issuing banks, regard to this fundamental rule of prudent conduct is an
impossibility. It lies in their nature to build upon the fact that a proportion—the

III.18.30

impossibility. It lies in their nature to build upon the fact that a proportion—the
larger proportion—of the fiduciary media remains in circulation and that the claims
arising from this part of the issue will not be enforced, or at least will not be
enforced simultaneously. They are bound to collapse as soon as confidence in their
conduct is destroyed and the creditors storm their counters. They, therefore, are
unable to aim at liquidity of investment like all other banks and undertakings in
general; they have to be content with solvency as the goal of their policy.
This is customarily overlooked when the covering of the issue of fiduciary media
by means of short-term loans is referred to as a method that is peculiarly suited to
their nature and function, and when the appellation "characteristically banking type
of cover" is applied to it,*51 because it is supposed that consistent application of the
general rule about liquidity to the special circumstances of the credit-issuing banks
shows it to be the system of investment that is proper to such banks. Whether the
assets of a credit-issuing bank consist of short-term bills or of hypothecary loans
remains a matter of indifference in the case of a general run. If the bank is in
immediate need of large sums of money it can procure them only by disposing of
its assets; when the panic -stricken public is clamoring at its counters for the
redemption of notes or the repayment of deposits, a bill that has still thirty days to
run is of no more use to it than a mortgage which is irredeemable for just as many
years. At such moments the most that can matter is the greater or lesser
negotiability of the assets. But in certain circumstances, long-term or even
irredeemable claims may be easier to realize than short-term; in times of crisis,
government annuities and mortgages may perhaps find buyers more readily than
commercial bills.

III.18.31

It has already been mentioned that in most states two categories of banks exist, as
far as the public confidence they enjoy is concerned. The central bank-of-issue,
which is usually the only bank with the right to issue notes, occupies an exceptional
position, owing to its partial or entire administration by the state and the strict
control to which all its activities are subjected. *52 It enjoys a greater reputation than
the other credit-issuing banks, which have not such a simple type of business to
carry on, which often risk more for the sake of profit than they can be responsible
for, and which, at least in some states, carry on a series of additional enterprises,
the business of company formation for example, besides their banking activities
proper, the negotiation of credit and the granting of credit through the issue of
fiduciary media. These banks of the second order may under certain circumstances
lose the confidence of the public without the position of the central bank being
shaken. In this case they are able to maintain themselves in a state of liquidity by
securing credit from the central bank on their own behalf (as indeed they. also do in
other cases when their resources are exhausted) and so being enabled to meet their
obligations punctually and in full. It is therefore possible to say that these banks are
in a state of liquidity so long as their liabilities as they fall due from day to day are
balanced by such assets as the central bank considers a sufficient security for
advances. It is well known that some banks are not liquid even in this sense. The
central banks of individual countries could similarly attain a state of liquidity if
they only carried such assets against their issues of fiduciary media as would be
regarded as possible investments by their sister institutions abroad. But even then it
would remain true that it is theoretically impossible to maintain the credit bank
system in a state of liquidity. A simultaneous destruction of confidence in all banks
would necessarily lead to a general collapse.

III.18.32

It is true that the investment of its assets in short-term loans does make it possible
for a bank to satisfy its creditors within a certain comparatively short period. But
this would prove adequate in the face of a loss of confidence only if the holders of
notes and deposits did not apply simultaneously to the bank for immediate payment

III.18.33

notes and deposits did not apply simultaneously to the bank for immediate payment
of the sums of money owing to them. Such a supposition is not very probable.
Either there is no lack of confidence at all or it is general. There is only one way in
which liquidity of status might be at least formally secured with regard to the
special circumstances of credit-issuing banks. If such banks made loans only on the
condition that they had the right to demand repayment at any time, then the
problem of liquidity would of course be solved for them in a simple manner. But
from the point of view of the community as a whole, this is of course no solution,
but only a shelving, of the problem. The status of the bank could only apparently be
kept liquid at the expense of the status of those who borrowed from it, for these
would be faced with precisely the same insurmountable difficulty. The banks'
debtors would not have kept the borrowed sums in their safes, but would have put
them into productive investments from which they certainly could not withdraw
them without delay. The problem is thus in no way altered; it remains insoluble.
6 The Significance of Short-Term Cover
Credit-issuing banks as a rule give preference to short-term loans as investments.
Often the law compels them to do this, but in any case they would be forced to do it
by public opinion. But the significance of this preference has nothing to do with the
greater ease with which it is generally, but erroneously, supposed to allow the
fiduciary media to be redeemed. It is true that it is a policy that has preserved the
bank-credit system in the past from severe shocks; it is true that its neglect has
always avenged itself; and it is true that it still is important for the present and
future; but the reasons for this are entirely different from those which the
champions of short-term cover are in the habit of putting forward.

III.18.34

One of its reasons, and the less weighty, is that it is easier to judge the soundness of
investments made in the form of short-term loans than that of long-term
investments. It is true that there are numer ous long-term investments that are
sounder than very many short-term investments; nevertheless, the soundness of an
investment can as a rule be judged with greater certainty when all that has to be
done is to survey the circumstances of the market in general and of the borrower in
particular for the next few weeks or months, than when it is a matter of years or
decades.

III.18.35

The second and decisive reason has already been mentioned. *53 If the granting of
credit through the issue of fiduciary media is restricted to loans that are to be paid
back after a short space of time, then there is a certain limitation of the amount of
the issue of fiduciary media. The rule that it is desirable for credit-issuing banks to
grant only short-term loans is the outcome of centuries of experience. It has been
its fate always to be misunderstood; but even so, obedience to it has had the
important effect of helping to limit the issue of fiduciary media.

III.18.36

7 The Security of the Investments of the Credit-issuing Banks
The solution of the problem of soundness is no more difficult for the credit-issuing
banks than for the credit-negotiating banks. If the fiduciary media are issued only
on good security and if a guarantee fund is created out of the bank's share capital
for the purpose of covering losses, for even under prudent management losses
cannot always be avoided, then the bank can put itself in a position to redeem in
full the fiduciary media that it issues, although not within the term specified in its
promises to pay.

III.18.37

Nevertheless, the soundness of the cover is only of subordinate importance as far as
fiduciary media are concerned. It may disappear entirely, at least in a certain sense,

III.18.38

fiduciary media are concerned. It may disappear entirely, at least in a certain sense,
without prejudicing their capacity of circulation. Fiduciary media can even be
issued without any cover at all. This occurs, for example, when the state issues
token coins and does not devote the seigniorage to a particular fund for their
redemption. (Under certain circumstances, the metal value of the coins themselves
may be regarded as partial security. And of course the state as a whole has assets
that provide far greater security than any sort of special fund could offer) On the
other hand, even if the fiduciary media are completely covered by the assets of the
issuer, so that only the time of their redemption and not its ultimate occurrence is
open to question, this cannot have any sort of influence whatever in support of their
capacity for circulation; for this depends exclusively upon the expectation that the
issuer will redeem them promptly.
To have overlooked this is the error underlying all those proposals and experiments
which have aimed at guaranteeing the issue of fiduciary media by means of funds
consisting of nonliquid assets, such as mortgages. If those money substitutes that
are presented for redemption are immediately and fully redeemed in money, then,
beyond the cash reserve necessary for this redemption, no stock of goods is needed
for maintaining equivalence between the fiduciary media and money. If, however,
the money substitutes are not fully and immediately redeemed for money, then they
will not be reckoned as equivalent to money just because there are some goods
somewhere that will at some time be used to satisfy the demands that the holders of
the money substitutes are entitled to make on the ground of the claims that the
money substitutes embody. They will be valued at less than the sums of money to
which they refer, because their redemption is in doubt and at the best will not occur
until after the passage of a period of time. And so they will cease to be money
substitutes; if they continue to be used as media of exchange, it will be at an
independent valuation; they will be no longer money substitutes, but credit money.

III.18.39

For credit money also, that is for unmatured claims which serve as common media
of exchange, "cover" by a special fund is superfluous. So long as the claims are
tendered and accepted as money, and thus have obtained an exchange value in
excess of that which is attributed to them as mere claims, such a fund has no
bearing on the matter. The significance of the regulations as to cover and the funds
for that purpose lies here, as with fiduciary media, in the fact that they indirectly set
a limit to the quantity that can be issued. *54

III.18.40

8 Foreign Bills of Exchange as a Component of the Redemption Fund
Since it is not the object of a redemption fund to provide for the redemption of such
money substitutes as are returned to the bank because of lack of confidence in their
goodness, but only to provide the bank's customers with the media of exchange
necessary for dealing with persons who are not among its customers, it is obvious
that such a fund might be composed at least in part of such things as, without being
money, can be used like money for dealings with outsiders. These things comprise
not only foreign money substitutes but also all such claims as form the basis of the
international clearing business, primarily, that is to say, foreign bills, that is, bills
on foreign places. The issue of money substitutes cannot be increased beyond the
quantity given by the demand for money (in the broader sense) of the customers of
the bank for intercourse within the clientele of the bank. Only an extension of the

III.18.41

issued by the banks can be transformed into fiduciary media than if the bank held
nothing but money in readiness for the foreign dealings of its customers. In this
way a credit-issuing bank may even transform into fiduciary media almost all the
money substitutes that it issues. The private banks of many countries are now no
longer far removed from this state of affairs; they are in the habit of providing for
the prompt redemption of the money substitutes issued by them by holding a
reserve itself consisting of money substitutes; only so far as these covering money
substitutes are money certificates do the issued money substitutes not bear the
character of fiduciary media. It is only fairly recently that the central banks-of-issue
also have begun to adopt the practice of admitting money substitutes and foreign
bills into their conversion funds.
Just as the goldsmiths once began to lend out part of the moneys entrusted to them
for safekeeping, so the central banks have taken the step of investing their stock of
metal partly in foreign bills and other foreign credits. An example was set by the
Hamburg Giro Bank, which was accustomed to hold part of its reserve in bills on
London; it was followed during the last quarter of the nineteenth century by a
series of banks-of-issue. It was with regard to their profits that the banks accepted
this system of cover The investment of a part of the redemption fund in foreign
bills and other foreign balances that could be easily and quickly realized was
intended to reduce the costs of maintaining the reserve. In certain countries the
central banks-of-issue acquired a portfolio of foreign bills because the domestic
discount business was not sufficiently remunerative.*55 Generally speaking, it was
the central banks-of-issue and the governmental redemption funds of the smaller
and financially weaker countries that tried to save expense in this way. Since the
war, which has made the whole world poorer, their procedure has been widely
imitated. It is clear that the policy of investing the whole redemption fund in
foreign claims to gold cannot become universal. If all the countries of the world
were to go over to the gold-exchange standard and hold their redemption funds not
in gold but in foreign claims to gold, gold would no longer be required for
monetary purposes at all. That part of its value which is founded upon its
employment as money would entirely disappear. The maintenance of a goldexchange standard with the redemption fund invested in foreign bills undermines
the whole gold-standard system. We shall have to return to this point in chapter 20.

CHAPTER 19
Money, Credit, and Interest
1 On the Nature of the Problem
It is the object of this chapter to investigate the connection between the amount of
money in circulation and the level of the rate of interest. It has already been shown
that variations in the proportion between the quantity of money and the demand for
money influence the level of the exchange ratio between money and other
economic goods. It now remains for us to investigate whether the variations thus
evoked in the prices of commodities affect goods of the first order and goods of
higher orders to the same extent. Until now we have considered variations in the
exchange ratio between money and consumption goods only and left out of account
the exchange ratio between money and production goods. This procedure would
seem to be justifiable, for the determination of the value of consumption goods is
the primary process and that of the value of production goods is derived from it.
Capital goods or production goods derive their value from the value of their
prospective products; nevertheless, their value never reaches the full value of these
prospective products, but as a rule remains somewhat below it. The margin by
which the value of capital goods falls short of that of their expected products
constitutes interest; its origin lies in the natural difference of value between present
goods and future goods.*56 If price variations due to monetary determinants
happened to affect production goods and consumption goods in different degrees—
and the possibility cannot be dismissed offhand—then they would lead to a change
in the rate of interest. The problem suggested by this is identical with a second,
although they are usually dealt with separately: Can the rate of interest be affected
by the credit policy of the banks that issue fiduciary media? Are banks able to
depress the rate of interest charged by them, for those loans that their power to
issue fiduciary media enables them to make, until it reaches the limit set by the
technical working costs of the ir lending business? The question that confronts us
here is the much discussed question of the gratuitous nature of bank credit.

III.19.1

In lay circles this problem is regarded as long since solved. Money performs its
function as a common medium of exchange in facilitating not only the sale of
present goods but also the exchange of present goods for future goods and of future
goods for present goods. An entrepreneur who wishes to acquire command over
capital goods and labor in order to begin a process of production must first of all
have money with which to purchase them. For a long time now it has not been
usual to transfer capital goods by way of direct exchange. The capitalists advance
money to the producers, who then use it for buying means of production and for
paying wages. Those entrepreneurs who have not enough of their own capital at
their disposal do not demand production goods, but money. The demand for capital
takes on the form of a demand for money. But this must not deceive us as to the
nature of the phenomenon. What is usually called plentifulness of money and
scarcity of money is really plentifulness of capital and scarcity of capital. A real
scarcity or plentifulness of money can never be directly perceptible in the
community, that is, it can never make itself felt except through its influence on the
objective exchange value of money and the consequences of the variations so
induced. For since the utility of money depends exclusively upon its purchasing
power, which must always be such that total demand and total supply coincide, the
community is always in enjoyment of the maximum satisfaction that the use of
money can yield.

III.19.2

This was not recognized for a long time and to a large extent it is not recognized
even nowadays. The entrepreneur who would like to extend his business beyond
the bounds set by the state of the market is prone to complain of the scarcity of
money. Every increase in the rate of discount gives rise to fresh complaints about
the illiberality of the banks' methods or about the unreasonableness of the
legislators who make the rules that limit their powers of granting credit. The
augmentation of fiduciary media is recommended as a universal remedy for all the
ills of economic life. Much of the popularity of infla tionary tendencies is based on
similar ways of thinking. And it is not only laymen who subscribe to such views.
Even if experts have been unanimous on this point since the famous arguments of
David Hume and Adam Smith,*57 almost every year new writers come forward with
attempts to show that the size and composition of the stock of capital has no
influence on the level of interest, that the rate of interest is determined by the
supply of and the demand for credit, and that, without having to raise the rate of
interest, the banks would be able to satisfy even the greatest demands for credit that
are made upon them, if their hands were not tied by legislative provisions.*58

III.19.3

The superficial observer whose insight is not very penetrating will discover many
symptoms which seem to confirm the above views and others like them. When the
banks-of-issue proceed to raise the rate of discount because their note circulation
threatens to increase beyond the legally permissible quantity, then the most
immediate cause of their procedure lies in the provisions that have been made by
the legislators for the regulation of the ir right of issue. The general stiffening of the
rate of interest in the so-called money market, the market for short-term capital
investments, which occurs, or at least should occur, as a consequence of the rise of
the discount rate, is therefore, and wit h a certain appearance of justification, laid to
the charge of national banking policy. Still more striking is the procedure of the
central banks when they think it beyond their power to bring about the desired
general dearness in the money market by merely increasing the bank rate: they take
steps which have the immediate object of forcing up the rate of interest demanded
by the other national credit-issuing banks in their short-term-loan business. The
Bank of England is in the habit in such circumstances of forcing consols on the
open market,*59 the German Reichsbank of offering Treasury bonds for discount. If
these methods are considered by themselves, without account being taken of their
function in the market, then it seems reasonable to conclude that legislation and the
self-seeking policy of the banks are responsible for the rise in the rate of interest.
Inadequate Understanding of the complicated relationships of economic life makes
all such legislative provisions appear to be measures in favor of capitalism and
against the interest of the producing classes.*60

III.19.4

But the defenders of orthodox banking policy have been no happier in their
arguments. They evidence no very considerable insight into the problems lying
behind such slogans as "protection of the standard" and "control of excessive
speculation." Their prolix discussions are generously garnished with statistical data
that are incapable of proving anything, and they devote scrupulous attention to the
avoidance of the big questions of theory that constitute the bulk of their subject. It
is undeniable that there are some excellent works of a descriptive nature to be
found among the huge piles of valueless publications on banking policy of recent
years, but it is equally undeniable that with a few honorable exceptions their
contribution to theory cannot compare with the literary memorials left by the great
controversy of the Currency and Banking Schools.

III.19.5

The older English writers on the theory of the banking system made a determined
attempt to apprehend the essence of the problem. The question around which their
investigations centered is whether there is a limit to the granting of credit by the
banks; it is identical with the question of the gratuitous nature of credit; it is most

III.19.6

banks; it is identical with the question of the gratuitous nature of credit; it is most
intimately connected with the problem of interest. During the first four decades of
the nineteenth century the Bank of England was able to regulate only to a limited
degree the amount of credit granted by varying the rate of discount. Because of the
legislative restriction of the rate of interest which was not removed until 1837 it
could not raise its rate of discount above five percent; and it never allowed it to fall
below four percent.*61 At that time the best means it had of adjusting its portfolio to
the state of the capital market was the expansion and contraction of its discounting
activities. That explains why the old writers on banking theory mostly speak only
of increases and diminutions of the note circulation, a mode of expression that was
still retained long after the circumstances of the time would have justified reference
to rises and falls in the rate of discount. But this does not affect the essence of the
matter; in both problems, the only point at issue is whether the banks can grant
credit beyond the available amount of capital or not.*62
Both parties were agreed in answering this question in the negative. This is not
surprising. These English writers had an extraordinarily deep understanding of the
nature of economic activities; they combined thorough knowledge of the theoretical
literature of their time with an insight into economic life that was based upon their
own observations. Their strictly logical training permitted them rapidly and easily
to separate essentials from nonessentials and guarded them from mistaking the
outer husk of truth for the kernel that it encloses. Their views on the nature of
interest might diverge considerably—many of them, in fact, had but the vaguest
ideas on this important problem, whose significance was not made explicit until a
later stage in the development of the science—but they harbored no doubts that the
level of the rate of interest as determined by general economic conditions could
certainly not be influenced by an increase or diminution in the quantity of money
or other media of payment in circulation, apart from considerations of the increase
in the stock of goods available for productive purposes that might be brought about
by the diminution of the demand for money.

III.19.7

But beyond this the paths of the two schools diverged. Tooke, Fullarton, and their
disciples flatly denied that the banks had any power to increase the amount of their
note issue beyond the requirements of business. In their view, the media of
payment issued by the banks at any particular time adjust themselves to the
requirements of business in such a way that with their assistance the payments that
have to be made at that time at a given level of prices can all be settled by the use
of the existing quantity of money. As soon as the circulation is saturated, no bank,
whether it has the right to issue notes or not, can continue to grant credit except
from its own capital or from that of its depositors.*63 These views were directly
opposed to those of Lord Overstone, Torrens, and others, who started by assuming
the possibility of the banks having the power of arbitrarily extending their note
issue, and who attempted to determine the way in which the disturbed equilibrium
of the market would reestablish itself after such a proceeding. *64 The Currency
School propounded a theory, complete in itself, of the value of money and the

III.19.8

banking theory. The shortcomings exhibited by the system of the Currency School
have offered an easy target to the critical shafts of their opponents, and doubtless
the adherents of the banking principle deserve much credit for making use of this
opportunity. If this had been all that they did, if they had merely announced
themselves as critics of the currency principle, no objection could be raised against
them on that account. The disastrous thing about their influence lay in their
claiming to have created a comprehensive theory of the monetary and banking
systems and in their imagining that their obiter dicta on the subject constituted such
a theory. For the classical theory whose shortcomings should not be extenuated but
whose logical acuteness and deep insight into the complications of the problem are
undeniable, they substituted a series of assertions that were not always formulated
with precision and often contradicted one another. In so doing they paved the way
for that method of dealing with monetary problems that was customary in our
science before the labors of Menger began to bear their fruit.*65
The fatal error of Fullarton and his disciples was to have overlooked the fact that
even convertible banknotes remain permanently in circulation and can then bring
about a glut of fiduciary media the consequences of which resemble those of an
increase in the quantity of money in circulation. Even if it is true, as Fullarton
insists, that banknotes issued as loans automatically flow back to the bank after the
term of the loan has passed, still this does not tell us anything about the question
whether the bank is able to maintain them in circulation by repeated prolongation
of the loan. The assertion that lies at the heart of the position taken up by the
Banking School, namely that it is impossible to set and permanently maintain in
circulation more notes than will meet the public demand, is untenable; for the
demand for credit is not a fixed quantity; it expands as the rate of interest falls, and
contracts as the rate of interest rises. But since the rate of interest that is charged for
loans made in fiduciary media created expressly for that purpose can be reduced by
the banks in the first instance down to the limit set by the marginal utility of the
capital used in the banking business, that is, practically to zero, the whole edifice
built up by Tooke's school collapses.

III.19.9

It is not our task to give a historical exposition of the controversy between the two
famous English schools, however tempting an enterprise that may be. We must
content ourselves with reiterating that the works of the much abused Currency
School contain far more in the way of useful ideas and fruitful thoughts than is
usually assumed, especially in Germany, where as a rule the school is known
merely through the writings of its opponents, such as Tooke and Newmarch's
History of Prices, J. S. Mill's Principles, and German versions of the banking
principle which are deficient in comprehension of the nature of the problems they
deal with.

III.19.10

Before proceeding to investigate the influence of the creation of fiduciary media on
the determination of the objective exchange value of money and on the level of the
rate of interest, we must devote a few pages to the problem of the relationship
between variations in the quantity of money and variations in the rate of interest.

III.19.11

2 The Connection Between Variations in the Ratio Between the Stock of Money
and the Demand for Money and Fluctuations in the Rate of Interest
Variations in the ratio between the stock of money and the demand for money must
ultimately exert an influence on the rate of interest also; but this occurs in a
different way from that popularly imagined. There is no direct connection between

III.19.12

operating in a roundabout way through the displacements in the social distribution
of income and wealth which occur as a consequence of variations in the objective
exchange value of money.
A change in the ratio between the stock of money and the demand for money, and
the consequent variations in the exchange ratio between money and other economic
goods, can exert a direct influence on the rate of interest only when metallic money
is employed and variations arise in the quantity of metal available for industrial
purposes. The augmentation or diminution of the quantity of metal available for
nonmonetary uses signifies an augmentation or diminution of the national
subsistence fund and thus it influences the level of the rate of interest. It is hardly
necessary to state that the practical significance of this phenomenon is quite
trifling. We may, for example, imagine how small in comparison with the daily
accumulation of capital was the increase in the subsistence fund caused by the
discoveries of gold in South Africa, or even the increase in the subsistence fund
that would have occurred if the whole of the newly mined precious metal had been
used exclusively for industrial purposes. But however that may be, all that is
important for us is to show that this is a phenomenon that is only connected with
nonmonetary avenues of employment of the metal.

III.19.13

Now as far as the monetary function is concerned, a long discussion is not
necessary to show that everything here depends on whether or not the additional
quantity of money is employed uniformly for procuring production goods and
consumption goods. If an additional quantity of money were to increase the
demand both for consumption goods and for the corresponding goods of higher
order in exactly the same proportion or if the withdrawal from circulation of a
quantity of money were to diminish these demands in exactly the same proportion,
then there could be no question of such variations having a permanent effect on the
level of the rate of interest.

III.19.14

We have seen that displacements in the distribution of income and property
constitute an essential consequence of fluctuations in the objective exchange value
of money. But every variation in the distribution of income and property entails
variations in the rate of interest also. It is not a matter of indifference whether a
total income of a million kronen is distributed among a thousand persons in such a
way that a hundred persons get 2,800 kronen each and nine hundred persons 800
kronen each or in such a way that each of the thousand persons gets 1,000 kronen.
Generally speaking, individuals with large incomes make better provision for the
future than individuals with small incomes. The smaller an individual's income is,
the greater is the premium which he sets on present goods in comparison with
future goods. Conversely increased prosperity means increased provision for the
future and higher valuation of future goods.*66

III.19.15

Variations in the ratio between the stock of money and the demand for money can
permanently influence the rate of interest only through the displacements in the
distribution of property and income that they evoke. If the distribution of income
and property is modified in such a way as to increase capacity for saving, then
eventually the ratio between the value of present goods and future goods must be
modified in favor of the latter. In fact, one of the elements that help to determine

III.19.16

causes the rate of interest to fall and a diminution of the stock of money causes it to
rise. Whether the one or the other consequence occurs always depends on whether
the new distribution of property is more or less favorable to the accumulation of
capital. But this circumstance may be different in each individual case, according to
the relative quantitative weight of the particular factors composing it. Without
knowledge of the actual data it is impossible to say anything definite about it.
These are the long-run effects on the rate of interest caused by variations in the
ratio between the total demand for money and the total stock of it. They come
about in consequence of displacements in the distribution of income and property
evoked by fluctuations in the objective exchange value of money, and are as
permanent as these fluctuations. But during the period of transition there occur
other variations in the rate of interest that are only of a transitory nature. Reference
has already been made to the fact that the general economic consequences of
variations in the exchange value of money arise in part from the fact that the
variations do not appear everywhere simultaneously and uniformly, but start from a
particular point and only spread gradually throughout the market. So long as this
process is going on, differential profits or differential losses occur, which are in
fact the source from which the variations in the distribution of income and property
arise. As a rule, it is the entrepreneurs who are first affected. If the objective
exchange value of money falls, the entrepreneur gains; for he will still be able to
meet part of his expenses of production at prices that do not correspond to the
higher price level, while, on the other hand, he will be able to dispose of his
product at a price that is in accordance with the variation that has meanwhile
occurred. If the objective exchange value of money rises, the entrepreneur loses;
for he will only be able to secure for his products a price in accordance with the fall
in the price level, while his expenses of production must still be met at the higher
prices. In the first case, the incomes of entrepreneurs will rise during the transition
period; in the second case, they will fall. This cannot fail to have an influence on
the rate of interest. An entrepreneur who is making bigger profits will be prepared
if necessary to pay a higher rate of interest, and the competition of other would-be
borrowers, who are attracted by the same prospect of increased profits, will make
payment of the higher rate necessary. The entrepreneur with whom business is bad
will only be able to pay a lower rate of interest and the pressure of competition will
oblige lenders to be content with the lower rate. Thus a falling value of money goes
hand in hand with a rising rate of interest, and a rising value of money with a
falling rate of interest. This lasts as long as the movement of the objective
exchange value of money continues. When this ceases, then the rate of interest is
reestablished at the level dictated by the general economic situation. *68

III.19.17

Thus, variations in the rate of interest do not occur as immediate consequences of
variations in the ratio between the demand for money and the stock of it; they are
only produced by the displacements in the social distribution of property that
accompany the fluctuations in the objective exchange value of money that the
variations in the ratio between the stock of money and the demand for it evoke.
Moreover, the oft-repeated question of the precise connection between variations in
the objective exchange value of money and variations in the rate of interest betrays
an unfortunate confusion of ideas. The variations in the relative valuations of
present goods and future goods are not different phenomena from the variations in
the objective exchange value of money. Both are part of a single transformation of
existing economic conditions, determined in the last resort by the same factors. In
now devoting to it the consideration it deserves, we atone for a negligence and fill a
gap in the argument contained in our second part.

III.19.18

3 The Connection Between the Equilibrium Rate and the Money Rate of Interest
An increase in the stock of money in the broader sense caused by an issue of
fiduciary media means a displacement of the social distribution of property in favor
of the issuer. If the fiduciary media are issued by the banks, then this displacement
is particularly favorable to the accumulation of capital, for in such a case the
issuing body employs the additional wealth that it receives solely for productive
purposes, whether directly by initiating and carrying through a process of
production or indirectly by lending to producers. Thus, as a rule, the fall in the rate
of interest in the loan market, which occurs as the most immediate consequence of
the increase in the supply of present goods that is due to an issue of fiduciary
media, must be in part permanent; that is, it will not be wiped out by the reaction
that is afterward caused by the diminution of the property of other persons. There is
a high degree of probability that extensive issues of fiducia ry media by the banks
represent a strong impulse toward the accumulation of capital and have
consequently contributed to the fall in the rate of interest.

III.19.19

One thing must be clearly stated at this point: there is no direct arithmetical
relatio nship between an increase or decrease in the issue of fiduciary media on the
one hand and the reduction or increase in the rate of interest which this indirectly
brings about through its effects on the social distribution of property on the other
hand. This would follow merely from the circumstance that there is no direct
relationship between the redistribution of property and the differences in the way in
which the existing stock of goods in the community is employed. The redistribution
of property causes individual economic agents to take different decisions from
those they would otherwise have taken. They deal with the goods at their disposal
in a different way; they allocate them differently between present (consumptive)
employment and future (productive) employment. This may give rise to an
alteration in the size of the national subsistence fund if the alterations in the uses to
which the goods are put by the individual economic agents do not offset one
another but leave a surplus in the one direction or the other This alteration in the
size of the national subsistence fund is the most immediate cause of the variation
which occurs in the rate of interest; and since, as has been shown, it is by no means
unequivocally determined by the extent and direction of the fluctuation in the stock
of money in the broader sense, but depends upon the whole social distributive
structure, no direct relationship can be established between the variations in the
stock of money in the broader sense and the variations in the rate of interest. In fact
it is obvious that however great the increase in the stock of money in the broader
sense might be, whether it occurred by way of an increase in fiduciary media or by
way of an increase in the stock of money in the narrower sense, the rate of interest
could never be reduced to zero. That could take place only if the displacements that
occurred increased the national subsistence fund to such an extent that all
possibilities of increasing production by engaging in more productive "roundabout"
methods of production were exhausted. This would mean that in all branches of
production the time that elapsed between the commencement of production and the
enjoyment of the product was not taken into consideration, and production was
carried so far that the prices of the products were only just sufficient to pay an
equal return to the primary factors in each employment. In particular, as far as very
durable goods are concerned, this would mean that their quantity and durability
would be tremendously increased, until the prices of their services fell so low that
they would only just provide for the amortization of the investments. It is
impossible to conceive of the extent to which, for example, the supply of houses
would have to be increased for their annual rental value to fall to a sum which
would only just give a total return equal to their original cost by the time when
their lengthened lives came to an end. Where the lifetime of a good can be almost

III.19.20

their lengthened lives came to an end. Where the lifetime of a good can be almost
indefinitely increased under conditions of decreasing cost, the result is that its
services will become practically free goods. It seems hardly likely that a rigid proof
could be given to show that the increase in the size of the national subsistence fund
that may follow a redistribution of property could never go so far as this. But we
have sufficient capacity for estimating the quantities involved without this
unobtainable precise proof. As regards the displacements in the distribution of
property that are evoked by an increase in the circulation of fiduciary media, it
seems that we might go still further and safely assert that it can in no circumstances
be very considerable. Although we cannot prove this in any way, whether
deductively or inductively, it nevertheless appears a reasonable assertion to make.
And we may content ourselves with that; for we do not intend to base any kind of
further argument on such an undemonstrable proposition.
The question to which we now turn is the following: It is indisputable that the
banks are able to reduce the rate of interest on the credit they grant down to any
level above their working expenses (for example, the cost of manufacturing the
notes, the salaries of their staffs, etc.). If they do this, the force of competition
obliges other lenders to follow their example. Accordingly, it would be entirely
within the power of the banks to reduce the rate of interest down to this limit,
provided that in so doing they did not set other forces in motion which would
automatically reestablish the rate of interest at the level determined by the
circumstances of the capital market, that is, the market in which present goods and
future goods are exchanged for one another The problem that is before us is usually
referred to by the catch-phrase "gratuitous nature of credit." It is the chief problem
in the theory of banking.

III.19.21

It is a problem whose great theoretical and practical importance has often been
overlooked. The chief responsibility for this belongs to the not altogether fortunate
manner in whic h it has been formulated. At the present time, the problem of the
gratuitous nature of bank credit does not appear to be a very practical issue, and
since the inclination toward questions of pure theory is hardly prominent among
the economists of our day it is a problem that has been much neglected. Yet, if the
way in which the problem is stated is modified only a little the unjustifiability of
neglecting it becomes obvious, even from the point of view of those who are only
concerned with the needs of everyday life. A new issue of fiduciary media, as we
have seen, indirectly gives rise to a variation in the rate of interest by causing
displacements in the social distribution of income and property. But the new
fiduciary media coming on to the loan market have also a direct effect on the rate
of interest. They are an additional supply of present goods and consequently they
tend to cause the rate of interest to fall. The connection between these two effects
on the rate of interest is not obvious. Is there a force that brings both into harmony
or not? It is probable in the highest degree that the increase in the supply of
fiduciary media in the market in which present goods are exchanged for future
goods at first exerts a stronger influence than the displacement of the social
distribution which occurs as a consequence of it. Does the matter remain at that
stage? Is the immediate reduction of interest which indubitably follows the increase
of fiduciary media definitive or not?

III.19.22

Until now, the treatment that this problem has met with at the hands of economists
has fallen a long way short of its importance. Its real nature has for the most part
been misunderstood; and where the problem was incorrectly stated to start with, it
was natural that the subsequent attempts at its solution should not have been
successful. But even the few theories in which the essence of the problem has been
correctly apprehended have fallen into error in their efforts to solve it.

III.19.23

To one group of writers, the proble m appeared to offer little difficulty. From the
circumstance that it is possible for the banks to reduce the rate of interest in their
bank-credit business down to the limit set by their working costs, these writers
thought it permissible to deduce that credit can be granted gratuitously or, more
correctly, almost gratuitously. In drawing this conclusion, their doctrine implicitly
denies the existence of interest. It regards interest as com pensation for the
temporary relinquishing of money in the broader sense—a view, indeed, of
insurpassable naivety. Scientific critics have been perfectly justified in treating it
with contempt; it is scarcely worth even cursory mention. But it is impossible to
refrain from pointing out that these very views on the nature of interest hold an
important place in popular opinion, and that they are continually being propounded
afresh and recommended as a basis for measures of banking policy. *69

III.19.24

No less untenable is the attitude of orthodox scientific opinion toward the problem.
Orthodox scientific opinion, following in this the example set by the adherents of
the banking principle, is content to question the problem's existence. In fact, it
cannot do otherwise. If the opinion is held that the quantity of fiduciary media in
circulation can never exceed the demand—in the sense defined above—the
conclusion necessarily follows that the banks have not the ability to grant credit
gratuitously. Of course, they might not exact any reimbursement or compensation
beyond the prime costs of the loans granted by them. But doing this would not
fundamentally change the matter, except that the profits from the issue of fiduciary
media that the banks would otherwise receive themselves would now go to the
benefit of the borrowers. And since, according to this view, it does not lie in the
power of the banks arbitrarily to increase the quantity of fiduciary media in
circulation, the limitation of the issue of these would leave only small scope for the
influence of their discount policy on the general rate of interest. It follows that only
insignificant differences could arise between the rate of interest charged by creditissuing banks and that determined by the general economic situation for other
credit transactions.

III.19.25

We have already had an opportunity of finding out where the error in this argument
lies. The quantity of fiduciary media flowing from the banks into circulation is
admittedly limited by the number and extent of the requests for discounting that the
banks receive. But the number and extent of these requests are not independent of
the credit policy of the banks; by reducing the rate of interest charged on loans, it is
possible for the banks indefinitely to increase the public demand for credit. And
since the banks—as even the most orthodox disciples of Tooke and Fullarton
cannot deny—can meet all these demands for credit, they can extend their issue of
fiduciary media arbitrarily. For obvious reasons an individual bank is not in a
position to do this so long as its competitors act otherwise; but there seems to be no
reason why all the credit-issuing banks in an isolated community, or in the whole
world, taken together could not do this by uniform procedure. If we imagine an
isolated community in which there is only a single credit-issuing bank in business,
and if we further assume (what indeed is obvious) that the fiduciary media issued
by it enjoy general confidence and are freely employed in business as money
substitutes, then the weakness of the assertions of the orthodox theory of banking is
most clear In such a situation there are no other limits to the bank's issue of
fiduciary media than those which it sets itself.

III.19.26

But even the Currency School has not treated the problem in a satisfactory manner
It would appear—exhaustive historical investigation might perhaps lead to another
conclusion—that the Currency School was merely concerned to examine the
consequences of an inflation of fiduciary media in the case of the coexistence of
several independent groups of banks in the world, starting from the assumption that
these groups of banks did not all follow a uniform and parallel credit policy. The

III.19.27

these groups of banks did not all follow a uniform and parallel credit policy. The
case of a general increase of fiduciary media, which for the first half of the
nineteenth century had scarcely any immediate practical importance, was not
included within the scope of its investigations. Thus it did not even have occasion
to consider the most important aspect of the problem. What is necessary for
clearing up this important problem still remains to be done; for even Wicksell's
most noteworthy attempt cannot be said to have achieved its object. But at least it
has the merit of having stated the problem clearly.
Wicksell distinguishes between the natural rate of interest (natürliche Kapitalzins),
or the rate of interest that would be determined by supply and demand if actual
capital goods were lent without the mediation of money, and the money rate of
interest (Geldzins), or the rate of interest that is demanded and paid for loans in
money or money substitutes. The money rate of interest and the natural rate of
interest need not necessarily coincide, since it is possible for the banks to extend
the amount of their issues of fiduciary media as they wish and thus to exert a
pressure on the money rate of interest that might bring it down to the minimum set
by their costs. Nevertheless, it is certain that the money rate of interest must sooner
or later come to the level of the natural rate of interest, and the problem is to say in
what way this ultimate coincidence is brought about.*70 Up to this point Wicksell
commands assent; but his further argument provokes contradiction.

III.19.28

According to Wicksell, at every time and under all possible economic conditions
there is a level of the average money rate of interest at which the general level of
commodity prices no longer has any tendency to move either upward or downward.
He calls it the normal rate of interest; its level is determined by the prevailing
natural rate of interest, although, for certain reasons which do not concern our
present problem, the two rates need not coincide exactly. When, he says, from any
cause whatever, the average rate of interest is below this normal rate, by any
amount, however small, and remains at this level, a progressive and eventually
enormous rise of prices must occur "which would naturally cause the banks sooner
or later to raise their rates of interest."*71 Now, so far as the rise of prices is
concerned, this may be provisionally conceded. But it still remains inconceivable
why a general rise in commodity prices should induce the banks to raise their rates
of interest. It is clear that there may be a motive for this in the regulations, whether
legislative or established by mercantile custom, that limit the circulation of
fiduciary media; or necessary consideration of the procedure of other banks might
have the same sort of effect. But if we start with the assumption, as Wicksell does,
that only fiduciary media are in circulation and that the quantity of them is not
legislatively restricted, so that the banks are entirely free to extend their issues of
them, then it is impossible to see why rising prices and an increasing demand for
loans should induce them to raise the rate of interest they charge for loans. Even
Wicksell can think of no other reason for this than that since the requirements of
business for gold coins and banknotes becomes greater as the price level rises, the
banks do not receive back the whole of the sums they have lent, part of them
remaining in the hands of the public; and that the bank reserves are consequently
depleted while the total liabilities of the banks increase; and that this must naturally
induce them to raise their rate of interest.*72 But in this argument Wicksell
contradicts the assumption that he takes as the starting point of his investigation.
Consideration of the level of its cash reserves and their relation to the liabilities
arising from the issue of fiduciary media cannot concern the hypothetical bank that
he describes. He seems suddenly to have forgotten his original assumption of a
circulation consisting exclusively of fiduciary media, on which assumption, at first,
he rightly laid great weight.

III.19.29

Wicksell incidentally makes cursory mention of a second limit to the circulation of
fiduciary media. He thinks that the banks that charge a lower rate of interest than
that which corresponds to the average level of the natural rate of interest encounter
a limit which is set by the employment of the precious metals for industrial
purposes. If the purchasing power of money is too low it discourages the
production of gold but increases, ceteris paribus, the industrial consumption of
gold, and the deficiency which would arise as soon as consumption began to
exceed production has to be made up from the bank reserves.*73 This is perfectly
true when metallic money is employed; an increase of fiduciary media must be
stopped before the reduction of the objective exchange value of money that it
brings about absorbs the value arising from the monetary employment of the metal.
As soon as the objective exchange value of money had sunk below the value of the
metal in industrial uses, every further loss in value (which, of course, would also
affect the purchasing power of the money substitutes in the same degree), would
send all those who needed the metal for industrial purposes to the counters of the
banks as their cheapest source of supply. The banks would not be able to extend
their issue any further since it would be possible for their customers to make a
profit simply by the exchange of fiduciary media for money; all fiduciary media
issued beyond the given limit would return immediately to the banks.*74

III.19.30

But demonstrating this does not bring us a step nearer to the solution of our
problem. The mechanism, by which a further issue of fiduciary media is restricted
as soon as the falling objective exchange value of the material from which the
money is made has reached the level set by its industrial employment, is, of course,
effective only in the case of commodity money; in the case of credit money, it is
effective only when the embodied claim refers to commodity money. And it is
never effective in the case of fiat money. Of greater importance is a second factor:
this limit is a distant one, so that even when it is eventually effective it still leaves
considerable scope for an increase in the issue of fiduciary media. But it by no
means follows from this that it remains possible for the banks to reduce the rate of
interest on loans as much as they like within these wide limits; as the following
argument will attempt to prove.

III.19.31

4 The Influence of the Interest Policy of the Credit-issuing Banks on Production
Assuming uniformity of procedure, the credit-issuing banks are able to extend their
issues indefinitely. It is within their power to stimulate the demand for capital by
reducing the rate of interest on loans, and, except for the limits mentioned above, to
go so far in this as the cost of granting the loans permits. In doing this they force
their competitors in the loan market, that is all those who do not lend fiduciary
media which they have created themselves, to make a corresponding reduction in
the rate of interest also. Thus the rate of interest on loans may at first be reduced by
the credit-issuing banks almost to zero. This, of course, is true only under the
assumption that the fiduciary media enjoy the confidence of the public so that if
any requests are made to the banks for liquidation of the promise of prompt cash
redemption which constitutes the nature of fiduciary media, it is not because the
holders have any doubts as to their soundness. Assuming this, the only possible
reason for the withdrawal of deposits or the presentation of notes for redemption is
the existence of a demand for money for making payments to persons who do not
belong to the circle of customers of the individual banks. The banks need not
necessarily meet such demands by paying out money; the fiduciary media of those
banks among whose customers are those persons to whom the banks' own
customers wish to make payments are equally serviceable in this case. Thus there
ceases to be any necessity for the banks to hold a redemption fund consisting of
money; its place may be taken by a reserve fund consisting of the fiduciary media

III.19.32

money; its place may be taken by a reserve fund consisting of the fiduciary media
of other banks. If we imagine the whole credit system of the world concentrated in
a single bank, it will follow that there is no longer any presentation of notes or
withdrawal of deposits; in fact, the whole demand for money in the narrower sense
may disappear. These suppositions are not at all arbitrary. It has already been
shown that the circulation of fiduciary media is possible only on the assumption
that the issuing bodies enjoy the full confidence of the public, since even the
dawning of mistrust would immediately lead to a collapse of the house of cards that
comprises the credit circulation. We know, furthermore, that all credit-issuing
banks endeavor to extend their circulation of fiduciary media as much as possible,
and that the only obstacles in their way nowadays are legal prescriptions and
business customs concerning the covering of notes and deposits, not any resistance
on the part of the public. If there were no artificial restriction of the credit system at
all, and if the individual credit-issuing banks could agree to parallel procedure, then
the complete cessation of the use of money would only be a question of time. It is,
therefore, entirely justifiable to base our discussion on the above assumption.
Now, if this assumption holds good, and if we disregard the limit that has already
been mentioned as applying to the case of metallic money, then there is no longer
any limit, practically speaking, to the issue of fiduciary media; the rate of interest
on loans and the level of the objective exchange value of money is then limited
only by the banks' running costs—a minimum, incidentally which is extraordinarily
low. By making easier the conditions on which they will grant credit, the banks can
extend their issue of fiduciary media almost indefinitely. Their doing so must be
accompanied by a fall in the objective exchange value of money. The course taken
by the depreciation that is a consequence of the issue of fiduciary media by the
banks may diverge in some degree from that which it takes in the case of an
increase of the stock of money in the narrower sense, or from that which it takes
when the fiduciary media are issued otherwise than by banks; but the essence of the
process remains the same. For it is a matter of indifference whether the diminution
in the objective exchange value of money begins with the mine owners, with the
government which issues fiat money credit money, or token coins, or with the
undertakings that have the newly issued fiduciary media placed at their disposal by
way of loans.

III.19.33

Painful consideration of the question whether fiduciary media really could be
indefinitely augmented without awakening the mistrust of the public would be not
only supererogatory, but otiose. For the problems of theory that we are dealing
with, it is a question that has scarcely any significance. We are not conducting our
investigation in order to show that the objective exchange value of money and the
rate of interest on loans could be reduced almost to zero; but in order to disclose the
consequences that arise from the divergence (which we have shown to be possible)
between the money rate and the natural rate of interest. For this reason, it is also a
matter of indifference to us, as we have just shown, that under a system of
commodity money the fiduciary media cannot continue to be augmented after the
objective exchange value of the money is reduced to the level determined by the
industrial employment of the metal.

III.19.34

If it is possible for the credit-issuing banks to reduce the rate of interest on loans
below the rate determined at the time by the whole economic situation (Wicksell's
natürliche Kapitalzins or natural rate of interest), then the question arises of the

III.19.35

more detailed examination proves to be one of the greatest importance for
comprehension of many of the processes of modern economic life, has until now
hardly been dealt with seriously at all.
We shall not say anything further here of the effects of an increased issue of
fiduciary media on the determination of the objective exchange value of money;
they have already been dealt with exhaustively. Our task now is merely to discover
the general economic consequences of any conceivable divergence between the
natural and money rates of interest, given uniform procedure on the part of the
credit-issuing banks. We obviously need only consider the case in which the banks
reduce the rate of interest below the natural rate. The opposite case, in which the
rate of interest charged by the banks is raised above the natural rate, need not be
considered; if the banks acted in this way, they would simply withdraw from the
competition of the loan market, without occasioning any other noteworthy
consequences.

III.19.36

The level of the natural rate of interest is limited by the productivity of that
lengthening of the period of production which is just justifiable economically and
of that additional lengthening of the period of production which is just not
justifiable; for the interest on the unit of capital upon whose aid the lengthening
depends must always amount to less than the marginal return of the justifiable
lengthening and to more than the marginal return of the unjustifiable lengthening.
The period of production which is thus defined must be of such a length that
exactly the whole available subsistence fund is necessary on the one hand and
sufficient on the other for paying the wages of the laborers throughout the duration
of the productive process. For if it were shorter, all the workers could no longer be
provided for throughout its whole course, and the consequence would be an urgent
offer of the unemployment economic factors which could not fail to bring about a
transformation of the existing arrangement.*75 Now if the rate of interest on loans is
artificially reduced below the natural rate as established by the free play of the
forces operating in the market, then entrepreneurs are enabled and obliged to enter
upon longer processes of production. It is true that longer roundabout processes of
production may yield an absolutely greater return than shorter processes; but the
return from them is relatively smaller, since although continual lengthening of the
capitalistic process of production does lead to continually increasing returns, after a
certain point is reached the increments themselves are of decreasing amount.*76
Thus it is possible to enter upon a longer roundabout process of production only if
this smaller additional productivity will still pay the entrepreneur. So long as the
rate of interest on loans coincides with the natural rate, it will not pay him; to enter
upon a longer period of production would involve a loss. On the other hand, a
reduction of the rate of interest on loans must necessarily lead to a lengthening of
the average period of production. It is true that fresh capital can be employed in
production only if new roundabout processes are started. But every new roundabout
process of production that is started must be more roundabout than those already
started; new roundabout processes that are shorter than those already started are not
available, for capital is of course always invested in the shortest available
roundabout processes of production, because they yield the greatest returns. It is
only when all the short roundabout processes of production have been appropriated
that capital is employed in the longer ones.

III.19.37

A lengthening of the period of production is only practicable, however, either when
the means of subsistence have increased sufficiently to support the laborers and
entrepreneurs during the longer period or when the wants of producers have
decreased sufficiently to enable them to make the same means of subsistence do for
the longer period. Now it is true that an increase of fiduciary media brings about a
redistribution of wealth in the course of its effects on the objective exchange value

III.19.38

redistribution of wealth in the course of its effects on the objective exchange value
of money which may well lead to increased saving and a reduction of the standard
of living. A depreciation of money, when metallic money is employed, may also
lead directly to an increase in the stock of goods in that it entails a diversion of
some metal from monetary to industrial uses. So far as these factors enter into
consideration, an increase of fiduciary media does cause a diminution of even the
natural rate of interest, as we could show if it were necessary. But the case that we
have to investigate is a different one. We are not concerned with a reduction in the
natural rate of interest brought about by an increase in the issue of fiduciary media,
but with a reduction below this rate in the money rate charged by the banks,
inaugurated by the credit-issuing banks and necessarily followed by the rest of the
loan market. The power of the banks to do such a thing has already been
demonstrated.
The situation is as follows: despite the fact that there has been no increase of
intermediate products and there is no possibility of lengthening the average period
of production, a rate of interest is established in the loan market which corresponds
to a longer period of production; and so, although it is in the last resort
inadmissible and impracticable, a lengthening of the period of production promises
for the time to be profitable. But there cannot be the slightest doubt as to where this
will lead. A time must necessarily come when the means of subsistence available
for consumption are all used up although the capital goods employed in production
have not yet been transformed into consumption goods. This time must come all
the more quickly inasmuch as the fall in the rate of interest weakens the motive for
saving and so slows up the rate of accumulation of capital. The means of
subsistence will prove insufficient to maintain the laborers during the whole period
of the process of production that has been entered upon. Since production and
consumption are continuous, so that every day new processes of production are
started upon and others completed, this situation does not imperil human existence
by suddenly manifesting itself as a complete lack of consumption goods; it is
merely expressed in a reduction of the quantity of goods available for consumption
and a consequent restriction of consumption. The market prices of consumption
goods rise and those of production goods fall.

III.19.39

This is one of the ways in which the equilibrium of the loan market is reestablished
after it has been disturbed by the intervention of the banks. The increased
productive activity that sets in when the banks start the policy of granting loans at
less than the natural rate of interest at first causes the prices of production goods to
rise while the prices of consumption goods, although they rise also, do so only in a
moderate degree, namely, only insofar as they are raised by the rise in wages. Thus
the tendency toward a fall in the rate of interest on loans that originates in the
policy of the banks is at first strengthened. But soon a countermovement sets in: the
prices of consumption goods rise, those of production goods fall. That is, the rate of
interest on loans rises again, it again approaches the natural rate.

III.19.40

This countermovement is now strengthened by the fact that the increase of the
stock of money in the broader sense that is involved in the increase in the quantity
of fiduciary media reduces the objective exchange value of money. Now, as has
been shown, so long as this depreciation of money is going on, the rate of interest
on loans must rise above the level that would be demanded and paid if the objective
exchange value of money remained unaltered. *77

III.19.41

At first the banks may try to oppose these two tendencies that counteract their
interest policy by continually reducing the rate of interest charged for loans and
forcing fresh quantities of fiduciary media into circulation. But the more they thus
increase the stock of money in the broader sense, the more quickly does the value

III.19.42

increase the stock of money in the broader sense, the more quickly does the value
of money fall, and the stronger is its countereffect on the rate of interest. However
much the banks may endeavor to extend their credit circulation, they cannot stop
the rise in the rate of interest. Even if they were prepared to go on increasing the
quantity of fiduciary media until further increase was no longer possible (whether
because the money in use was metallic money and the limit had been reached
below which the purchasing power of the money-and-credit unit could not sink
without the banks being forced to suspend cash redemption, or whether because the
reduction of the interest charged on loans had reached the limit set by the running
costs of the banks), they would still be unable to secure the intended result. For
such an avalanche of fiduciary media, when its cessation cannot be foreseen, must
lead to a fall in the objective exchange value of the money-and-credit unit to the
paniclike course of which there can be no bounds.*78 Then the rate of interest on
loans must also rise in a similar degree and fashion.
Thus the banks will ultimately be forced to cease their endeavors to underbid the
natural rate of interest. That ratio between the prices of goods of the first order and
of goods of higher orders which is determined by the state of the capital market and
has been disturbed merely by the intervention of the banks will be approximately
reestablished, and the only remaining trace of the disturbance will be a general
increase in the objective exchange value of money due to factors emanating from
the monetary side. A precise reestablishment of the old price ratios between
production goods and consumption goods is not possible, on the one hand because
the intervention of the banks has brought about a redistribution of property, and on
the other hand because the automatic recovery of the loan market involves certain
of the phenomena of a crisis, which are signs of the loss of some of the capital
invested in the excessively lengthened roundabout processes of production. It is not
practicable to transfer all the production goods from those uses that have proved
unprofitable to other avenues of employment; a part of them cannot be withdrawn
and must therefore either be left entirely unused or at least be used less
economically. In either case there is a loss of value. Let us, for example, suppose
that an artificial extension of bank credit is responsible for the establishment of an
enterprise which only yields a net profit of four percent. So long as the rate of
interest on loans was four and one-half percent, the establishment of such a
business could not be thought of; we may suppose that it has been made possible
by a fall to a rate of three and one-half percent which has followed an extension of
the issue of fiduciary media. Now let us assume the reaction to begin, in the way
described above. The rate of interest on loans rises to four and one-half percent
again. It will no longer be profitable to conduct this enterprise. Whatever may now
occur, whether the business is stopped entirely or whether it is carried on after the
entrepreneur has decided to make do with the smaller profits, in either case—not
merely from the individual point of view, but also from that of the community—
there has been a loss of value. Economic goods which could have satisfied more
important wants have been employed for the satisfaction of less important; only
insofar as the mistake that has been made can be rectified by diversion into another
channel can loss be prevented.

III.19.43

5 Credit and Economic Crises
Our theory of banking, like that of the currency principle, leads ultimately to a
theory of business cycles. It is true that the Currency School did not inquire
thoroughly into even this problem. It did not ask what consequences follow from
the unrestricted extension of credit on the part of the credit-issuing banks; it did not
even inquire whether it was possible for them permanently to depress the natural

III.19.44

rate of interest. It set itself more modest aims and was content to ask what would
happen if the banks in one country extended the issue of fiduciary media more than
those of other countries. Thus it arrived at its doctrine of the "external drain" and at
its explanation of the English crises that had occurred up to the middle of the
nineteenth century.
If our doctrine of crises is to be applied to more recent history, then it must be
observed that the banks have never gone as far as they might in extending credit
and expanding the issue of fiduciary media. They have always left off long before
reaching this limit, whether because of growing uneasiness on their own part and
on the part of all those who had not forgotten the earlier crises, or whether because
they had to defer to legislative regulations concerning the maximum circulation of
fiduciary media. And so the crises broke out before they need have broken out. It is
only in this sense that we can interpret the statement that it is apparently true after
all to say that restriction of loans is the cause of economic crises, or at least their
immediate impulse; that if the banks would only go on reducing the rate of interest
on loans they could continue to postpone the collapse of the market. If the stress is
laid upon the word postpone, then this line of argument can be assented to without
more ado. Certainly, the banks would be able to postpone the collapse; but
nevertheless, as has been shown, the moment must eventually come when no
further extension of the circulation of fiduciary media is possible. Then the
catastrophe occurs, and its consequences are the worse and the reaction against the
bull tendency of the market the stronger, the longer the period during which the
rate of interest on loans has been below the natural rate of interest and the greater
the extent to which roundabout processes of production that are not justified by the
state of the capital market have been adopted.

CHAPTER 20
Problems of Credit Policy
(I) Prefatory Remark
1 The Conflict of Credit Policies
Since the time of the Currency School, the policy adopted by the governments of
Europe and America with regard to the issue of fiduciary media has been guided,
on the whole, by the idea that it is necessary to impose some sort of restriction
upon the banks in order to prevent them from extending the issue of fiduciary
media in such a way as to cause a rise of prices that eventually culminates in an
economic crisis. But the course of this policy has been continually broken by
contrary aims. Endeavors have been made by means of credit policy to keep the
rate of interest low; "cheap money" (that is, low interest) and "reasonable" (that is,
high) pr ices have been aimed at. Since the beginning of the twentieth century these
endeavors have noticeably gained in strength; during the war and for some time
after it they were the prevailing aims.

III.20.1

The strange vicissitudes of credit policy cannot be described except by passing in
review the actual tasks that it has had to solve and will have to solve in the future.
Although the problems themselves may always be the same, the form they assume
changes. And, for the very reason that our task is to strip them of their disguises,
we must first study them in their contemporary garb. In what follows, separate
consideration will be given to such problems, first, as they exhibited themselves
before the war, and then, as they have exhibited themselves in the period
immediately after the war.*79

III.20.2

(II) Problems of Credit Policy Before the War*80
2 Peel's Act
Peel's Bank Act, and the ideas on which it was based, still sets the standard by
which credit policy is ultimately governed nowadays; even those countries that do
not follow the example of the English bank legislation, or do not follow it so
faithfully as others, have yet not been able to withstand its influence altogether.
Here we are confronted with a strange phenomenon. While the economic literature
of all countries was directing the most violent and passionate attacks against the
system of having a fixed quota of the note issue not backed by metal; while people
were untiring in calling Peel's Act the unfortunate legislative product of a mistaken
theory; while the currency principle continued to be represented as a system of
erroneous hypotheses that had long been confuted; yet one legislature after another
took steps to limit the issue of uncovered banknotes. And, remarkably enough, this
procedure on the part of governments evoked but little censure, if any at all, from
those whose views on banking theory should logically have led them most severely
to condemn it. To start from the banking principle, which denies the possibility of
an overissue of banknotes and regards "elasticity" as their essential characteristic, is
necessarily to arrive at the conclusion that any limitation of the circulation of notes,
whether they are backed by money or not, must prove injurious, since it prevents
the exercise of the chief function of the note issue, the contrivance of an adjustment
between the stock of money and the demand for money without changing the
objective exchange value of money. It might easily have appeared desirable to
Tooke's followers that provision should be made for backing that part of the note
circulation that was not backed by metal; but logically they should have

III.20.3

circulation that was not backed by metal; but logically they should have
condemned the prescription that a certain proportion was to be maintained between
the stock of metal and the note circulation. There is an irreconcilable contradiction,
however, between the theoretical arguments of these writers and the practical
conclusions that they draw from them. Scarcely any writer that need be taken
seriously ventures to put forward proposals that might fundamentally disturb the
various systems for restricting the unbacked note issue; not a single one definitely
demands their complete abolition. Nothing could show the inherent uncertainty and
lack of independence of modern banking theory better than this inconsistency. That
the note issue must somehow be restricted in order to guard against serious evils is
still accepted today as the essence of government wisdom in matters of banking
policy, and the science which claims to have produced proof to the contrary always
ends up by deferring to this dogma, which nobody is nowadays able to prove and
everybody thinks himself able to refute. The conversatism of the English hinders
them from meddling with a law which stands as a monument to an intellectual
contest which went on for many years and in which the best men of the time
participated; and the example of the world's chief bank influences all the other
banks. The conclusions of two generations of economists have not been able to
shake the opinions which are supposed to be the result of practical banking
experience.
Many serious errors are involved in the currency principle. The most serious lies in
its failure to recognize the essential similarity of banknotes and bank deposits.*81 Its
opponents have skillfully discovered these weak spots in the system and directed
their sharpest attacks accordingly. *82 But the doctrine of the Currency School does
not stand or fall by its views on the nature of checks and deposits. It is enough to
correct it on this one point—to take its propositions concerning the issue of notes
and apply them also to the opening of deposit accounts—to silence the censures of
those who adhere to the banking principle. That its mistake on this point is of small
significance in comparison with that made by the banking principle can hardly need
further discussion. And in any case, it does not seem an inexcusable mistake to
have made if we take into account the relatively backward development of even the
English deposit system at the time when the foundations of the classical theory of
banking were being laid, and if we further consider the ease with which the legal
differences between payment by note and payment by check might give rise to
error.

III.20.4

As far as Peel's Act was concerned, however, this very shortcoming of the theory
that had created it turned out to be an advantage; it caused the incorporation in it of

III.20.5

heroic remedy with a vengeance, in essence hardly differing at all from the
proposals of the downright opponents of all fiduciary media.
Nevertheless, something was overlooked in the calculations of the currency
theorists. They did not realize that unbacked deposits were substantially the same
as unbacked notes, and so they omitted to legislate for them in the same way as for
the notes. So far as the development of fiduciary media depended on the issue of
notes, Peel's Act completely restricted it; so far as it depended on the open ing of
deposit accounts, it was not interfered with at all. This forced the technique of the
English banking system in a direction in which it had already been urged in some
degree by the circumstance that the right of note issue in London and its environs
was an exclusive privilege of the Bank of England. The deposit system developed
at the expense of the note system. From the point of view of the community this
was a matter of indifference because notes and deposits both fulfill the same
functions. Thus Peel's Act did not achieve its aim, or at least not in the degree and
manner that its authors had intended; fiducia ry media, suppressed as banknotes,
developed in the form of deposits.

III.20.6

It is true that German writers on banking held that it was possible to discover a
fundamental difference between notes and deposits. But they did not succeed in
demonstrating their contention; in fact they did not really attempt to do so.
Nowhere is the inherent weakness of German banking theory more obvious than in
connection with this particular question of the note versus the check, which for
years has been the central issue of all discussion. Anybody who, like them, had
learned from the English Banking School that there is no fundamental difference
between notes and checks, and was in the constant habit of stressing this,*83 should
at least be prepared to supply a detailed proof in support of an assertion that the
banknote system represents "an earlier and lower stage of development of the credit
economy" than the deposit bank and the check, with the connected system of the
account current, book credit, and clearinghouse.*84 Certainly reference to England
and the United States cannot be accepted as proof of the correctness of this
assertion, least of all in the mouth of a decided opponent of Peel's Act and of the
restriction of the note issue in general; for it is undeniable that the great importance
of the deposit system and the decreasing relative importance of the banknote in
Anglo-Saxon countries are the result of that act. The consequence is that the
German literature on banking theory is full of almost unbelievable contradictions.*85

III.20.7

The repression of the banknote, as it has occurred in England and in the United
States—in different ways and for different reasons, but as a result of the same
fundamental ideas—and the corresponding growth in importance of the deposit,
and the additional circumstance that the organization of the deposit banks has not
attained that soundness that would have enabled it to retain the public confidence
during dangerous crises, have led to serious disturbances. In England, as also in the
United States, it has repeatedly happened in times of crisis that confidence has been
destroyed in those banks that circulate fiduciary media in the form of deposits,
while confidence in banknotes has been maintained. The measures by which the
consequences which such a collapse of a part of the national business organization
would infallibly have involved were avoided are well known. In England an
attempt was made to fill the gap in the circulation which was due to the lack of
large quantities of fiduciary media by the Bank of England being ready to increase
the issue of its own notes. In the United States, where the law made this solution
impossible, the clearinghouse certificates served the same purpose.*86 In both
countries, attempts to give this device a legislative basis were made. But Lowe's
bill was not passed, and even the Aldrich-Vreeland Act in the United States had
only a partial success.*87

III.20.8

None of the many systems of limiting the note circulation has proved ultimately
capable of interposing an insurmountable obstacle in the way of further creation of
fiduciary media. This is equally true of Peel's Act, which completely forbids the
new issue of fiduciary media in the shape of notes, and of such bank-of-issue
legislation in other states as does leave a certain scope for the augmentation of
notes not backed by money. Between the English act of 1844 and, say, the German
act of 1875, there seems to be a fundamental difference: while the one rigidly fixes,
for all time, the quota of the note circulation not backed by metal, the other,
inasmuch as it only requires that a certain proportion of the note circulation shall be
backed by metal and puts a tax upon the rest, does make provision within certain
limits for its future extension. But everything depends upon the scope that is thus
provided for extending the issue of fiduciary media. If it had been wide enough to
give free play to the development of the unbacked note circulation, then the
German law —and the same is true, not only of other laws based on the same
principle (for example, the Austrian), but also of those that attempt to limit the
circulation of notes in other ways, as for example, the French—would have had
fundamentally different results from the English. Since in fact it proved to be too
narrow for this, the difference between the two laws is merely one of degree, not
one of kind. All these laws have limited the issue of fiduciary media in the form of
notes, but have set no limits to their issue in the form of deposits. Making the issue
of notes more difficult was bound to promote an increased employment of deposits;
in place of the note, the deposit account came into prominence. For the
development of the credit system, this change was not altogether a matter of
indifference. The note is technically superior to the deposit in medium and small
transactions; in many cases for which it might have been used as a money
substitute, checks or clearing transfers could not be used, and in such cases
restriction of the issue of fiduciary media in the form of notes was bound to have
the effect of restriction of the issue of fiduciary media in general. Under the law of
the United States of America, the issue of fiduciary media in the shape of deposits
is also restricted; but since this only applies to some of the banks, namely, the
national banks, it is not enough to make a big difference between the deposit
business of the United States and that of the other countries in which no similar
regulations have been established.

III.20.9

The real obstacle in the way of an unlimited extension of the issue of fiduciary
media is not constituted by legislative restriction of the note issue, which, after all,
only affects a certain kind of fiduciary medium, but the lack of a centralized world
bank or of uniform procedure on the part of all credit-issuing banks. So long as the
banks do not come to an agreement among themselves concerning the extension of
credit, the circulation of fiduciary media can indeed be increased slowly, but it
cannot be increased in a sweeping fashion. Each individual bank can only make a
small step forward and must then wait until the others have followed its example.
Every bank is obliged to regulate its interest policy in accordance with that of the
others.

III.20.10

3 The Nature of Discount Policy
The most obscure and incorrect concepts are current concerning the nature of the
discount policy of the central banks-of-issue. Often the principal task of the banks
is said to be the protection of their cash reserves, as if it would pay them to make
sacrifices for such an aim as that. No less widespread, however, is the view that the
banks' obligation to follow a discount policy that takes account of the
circumstances of other banks is imposed upon them merely by a perverse
legislation and that the ideal of cheap money—in a double sense, namely, a low
purchasing power of money and a low rate of interest—could be realized by the

III.20.11

purchasing power of money and a low rate of interest—could be realized by the
abandonment of certain out-of-date legal provisions.
It is unnecessary to devote very much time to the refutation of such views as these.
After all that has been said on the nature of money and fiduciary media, there can
hardly be very much doubt as to the aim of the discount policy of the banks. Every
credit-issuing bank is obliged to fix the rate of interest it charges for loans in a
certain conformity with that of the other credit-issuing banks. The rate cannot be
allowed to sink below this level, for if it did, the sums of money needed by the
bank's rapidly extending clientele for making payments to customers of other banks
would increase in such a fashion that the bank's solvency would be imperiled. It is
by raising the rate of discount that the bank safeguards its own capacity to pay.
This end is certainly not attained by protecting the redemption fund, the small
insignificance of which for maintaining the value of the fiduciary media has
already been demonstrated, but by avoiding the artificial extension of the
circulation of fiduciary media that would result from asking less interest than the
other banks, and so also avoiding an increase in the demands for the redemption of
the fiduciary media. The banks would still have to have a discount policy even if
there were no legislative regulation of the note cover.

III.20.12

In Germany there has been a controversy as to whether certain measures of the
Reichsbank are dictated by regard to the circumstances of the domestic money
market or to those of the international. In the form in which it is usually put, the
question is meaningless. The mobility of capital goods, which nowadays is but
little restricted by legislative provisions such as customs duties, or by other
obstacles, has led to the formation of a homogeneous world capital market. In the
loan markets of the countries that take part in international trade, the net rate of
interest is no longer determined according to national, but according to
international, considerations. Its level is settled, not by the natural rate of interest in
the country, but by the natural rate of interest anywhere. Just as the exchange ratio
between money and other economic goods is the same in all places, so also the
ratio between the prices of goods of the first order and those of goods of higher
orders is the same everywhere. The whole system of modern international trade
would be completely changed if the mobility of capital goods were to be restricted.
In Germany there are many who demand such a prohibition or at least a
considerable restriction of the investment of capital abroad. It is not our task to
demonstrate what a small prospect of success a policy like this would have, or to
show that the time is now past for a nation to decide whether or not it will take part
in international trade. So long and insofar, however, as a nation participates in
international trade, its market is only a part of the world market; prices are
determined not nationally but internationally. The fact that the rate of interest in
Germany may rise, not because any change has occurred in its determinants within
the Reich but because there have been changes, say, in the United States, should
not seem any more remarkable than, say, a rise in the price of corn that is due to the
state of foreign harvests.

III.20.13

It has not been easy to reconcile policy with the extension and combination of
national markets into a world market. Stronger than the resistance encountered
centuries ago by the development of the town economy into the national economy
is that which the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have opposed to the further
stage of development into a world economy. Nowadays there is nothing like the
feeling of homogeneity which previously overcame regional interests; the
pronounced emphasis upon national antagonisms which sets the keynote of modern
policy would perhaps stand in the way of attempts at economic unification even if
there were no interests to which these attempts might prove injurious. From the
point of view of the producer, low prices seem to be the greatest of all evils, and in

III.20.14

point of view of the producer, low prices seem to be the greatest of all evils, and in
every state those producers who are unable to meet competition strive with all the
means at their disposal to keep the cheap commodities of the world market out of
the national market. But whether they succeed in this in each individual case or not
depends to a large extent on the strength of the political influence of the opposing
interests. For in the case of every individual commodity, the producers' interest in
high prices is opposed by the interest of consumers in the opening of the market to
the cheapening effect of foreign competition. The matter is only decided by the
conflict of the two groups. The distribution of forces is otherwise when the
problem of freedom of capital transactions is under discussion. We have already
seen that creditor interests always get the worst of it when they clash with debtor
interests. The interests of the capitalists are scarcely ever represented in monetary
policy. Nobody ever objects to the importation of capital from abroad on the
ground that it leads to a depression of the rate of interest in the home market and a
reduction of the income of the capitalists; quite the reverse. The universally
prevailing view is that it is in the interest of the community that the rate of interest
should be as low as possible. In those European states with large capital resources,
which so far as international dealings in capital are concerned need be considered
only as creditors and not as debtors, this policy is expressed in the endeavor to put
obstacles in the way of foreign investment. Undoubtedly, this is not the only point
of view from which modern states judge the export of capital. Other considerations
enter into the matter as well, some in favor of exportation, some against it. There is,
for instance, the fact that it is frequently impossible to export commodities except
by allowing the payment for them to be postponed, so that future goods are
acquired in exchange for the present goods surrendered; and that for this reason
alone it is consequently necessary to promote the export of capital or at least not to
hinder it.*88 Nevertheless, it must be insisted that the policy adopted by these states
with regard to the export of capital is guided by the endeavor, among others, to
keep the domestic rate of interest low. On the other hand, the same motive leads
these states which because they are poor in capital have to play the part of
international borrowers to encourage its importation.
The attempt to depress the domestic rate of interest by influencing the international
movement of capital is particularly pronounced in the so-called money market, that
is, in the market for short-term capital investments. In the so-called capital market,
that is, the market for long-term capital investments, there is less possibility of
effecting anything by intervention; in any case, any steps that may be taken become
effective much more quickly in the former than in the latter. Consequently there is
a greater propensity toward exerting an influence on the rate of interest on loans in
the money market than in the long-term capital market. But the most important
cause of the persistence of demands for the exertion of influence upon the money
market lies in the universally prevalent errors concerning the nature of fiduciary

III.20.15

rate of discount that can be traced to events abroad is an inducement to plead for a
modification of the banking system in the direction of releasing the central bank-ofissue from its obligation to provide gold for export on demand, would realize that
the increase in the rate of interest could be effectively stopped only by a
suppression of the export of capital and complete exclusion of the country from
international trade, then they would soon change their minds. And it seems that
these implications have already won some degree of general recognition, even if
the literary treatment of the problem may still leave something to be desired. In
Germany and Austria it was only the groups that demanded the seclusion of the
national market that also demanded the "isolation" of the currency.
Further explanation is unnecessary. Nevertheless, it may not be supererogatory to
examine one by one the measures that are recommended by those who favor a low
rate of interest and to show how incapable they would prove of leading to the
expected result.

III.20.16

4 The Gold-Premium Policy*89
Let us first review the systems which are supposed to be able to maintain the level
of the rate of discount in the national money market by making it more difficult or
more expensive to procure gold at a rate below that determined by the
circumstances of the international market. The most important and most well
known of these is the gold-premium policy, as it was carried out by the Bank of
France.

III.20.17

In view of the circumstances that nowadays the silver five-franc piece is still
legally current coin, the Bank of France is authorized to redeem its notes at its own
choice either in gold or in these pieces. It sometimes used to make use of this
authority for the purpose of increasing the difficulty of procuring gold for export
purposes. As a rule it made no difficulty about surrendering gold in exchange for
notes. And it exchanged five-franc pieces in the same way for gold coins, although
it was not obliged to do so, and by so doing it endowed the latter with the property
of being money substitutes. Naturally, these facilities were not requisitioned to a
great extent for purposes of domestic business. Notes and five-franc pieces enjoyed
unlimited public confidence so that their employability as money substitutes was
not in the least in question. But if the bank was asked to surrender gold for export,
it did not necessarily do so. It is true that it used to hand over gold unhesitatingly
for the requirements of what was called "legitimate" trade, that is, when it was
needed to pay for imported commodities, especially corn and cotton. But if gold
was demanded for the purpose of speculating on the difference between home and
foreign interest rates, it was not handed over as a matter of course. For this
purpose, the bank did not issue Napoleons, the French gold coins, at all; and it
issued ingots and foreign gold coins only at an additional charge, varying from four
to eight percent of the 3,437 francs at which it was legally bound to purchase a
kilogram of fine gold. It is impossible to state the exact amount of this "gold
premium," because the rate has never been published officially. *90

III.20.18

The purpose of the gold-premium policy was to postpone as long as ever possible
the moment when the condition of the international money market would force the
bank to raise the discount rate in order to prevent an efflux of gold. The lowness of
the rate of discount is of extraordinary importance in French financial policy. In the
interest of those classes of the community by which it is supported, the government
of the Third Republic is obliged to avoid anything that might injure the high

III.20.19

for it might induce some holders of rentes to dispose of their bonds in order to
reinvest their capital more fruitfully, and the disturbance of the market that might
result from this would have a disproportionately adverse effect on the quotation of
the rentes. It is undeniable that the result aimed at was to a certain extent attained,
even though the premium policy by no means possessed the significance that was
erroneously ascribed to it.
It is above all mistaken to ascribe the lowness of the rate of discount in France to
the procedure that has been described. If the rate of discount has been lower in
France than in other countries, this is due to altogether different causes. France is of
all the countries in the whole world that which is richest in capital; but its people
are not greatly endowed with the spirit of initiative and enterprise.*91 Consequently
its capital has to emigrate. Now in a country which exports capital, even
disregarding the premium for risk-bearing that is contained in the gross rate of
interest, the rate of interest on loans must be lower than in a country which imports
capital. Capitalists, when comparing the yields of home and foreign investment, are
led by a series of psychological factors to prefer the former to the latter when other
circumstances are equal. This is enough to explain why long-term and short-term
investments bear lower interest in France than in other countries, such as Germany.
The cause is a general economic cause; it is a matter in which measures of banking
or currency policy can have no influence. The ratio between the rate of interest in
France and that abroad could not for long be forced away by the premium policy of
the Bank of France from that determined by the general economic situation. The
Bank of France was not above the laws that govern the course of economic affairs.
In fixing the level of its discount rate, it was not exempt from the necessity for
paying due attention to the level of the natural rate of interest. Like every other
credit-issuing bank that has an influence on the domestic market, it had to endeavor
to keep the rate of interest on domestic short-term investments at such a level that
foreign investment did not appear so attractive to home capitalists as to endanger
the bank's own solvency. Like the others, the Bank of France could effectively
prevent an outflow of gold in one way only—by raising its discount rate.*92
Employing the premium policy could do no more than postpone for a short time a
rise in the rate of discount that the state of the international money market had
made necessary. The premium made it more expensive to export gold and so
reduced the profitability of interest arbitrage transactions. When it was widely
believed that the difference between the French and the foreign rates of interest was
about to be altered in France's favor through a fall in the foreign rate, then arbitrage
dealers would not export gold at all, since the small profit of the transaction would
be too greatly reduced by the premium. In this way the Bank of France may
sometimes have avoided raising the discount rate when it would otherwise have
been necessary to do so for a short time. But whenever the difference between the
rates of interest was significant enough to make short-term foreign investment still
promise to be profitable in spite of the increased cost of procuring gold due to the
premium, and whenever the result of arbitrage dealings was not jeopardized by the
prospect of an imminent reduction of the foreign rate, then even the Bank of France
could not avoid raising the rate of interest.

III.20.20

It has been asserted that it is possible for a central bank to use successive increases
of the premium so as entirely to prevent the export of gold if it continually forces
back the gold point or export limit as the fall in the rate of exchange requires.*93
This is undoubtedly correct. The procedure, as is well known, has been employed
repeatedly; it is known as cessation of cash payments. The bank that adopts it
deprives its fiduciary media of their character of money substitutes. If they
continue to function as general media of exchange, it is in the role of credit money.
Their value will have become subject to independent variation. In such a case, it is

III.20.21

Their value will have become subject to independent variation. In such a case, it is
admittedly possible for the bank to follow a completely independent discount
policy; it may now reduce to any desired extent the rate of interest it charges
without running the risk of insolvency. But this brings to light the consequences
that must follow a banking policy that endeavors by extending the issue of
fiduciary media to depress the rate of interest on loans below the natural rate of
interest. This point has already been discussed in detail; in the present connection
there is a second point that is of importance. If the intervention of the bank leads to
the artificial retention of the rate of interest on loans at a level below that of the rate
given by international conditions, then the capitalists will be all the more anxious
to invest their capital abroad as the gap between the domestic and foreign rates of
interest increases. The demand for foreign common media of exchange will
increase, because foreign capital goods will be desired more and home capital
goods less. And there is no way in which the fall ni the rate of exchange could
automatically set forces in motion to reestablish between the bank money and gold,
the world money, that exchange ratio which had previously existed when the notes
and deposits of the bank were not credit money but still money substitutes. The
mechanism of the monetary system tends to bring the exchange value of the two
kinds of money to that "natural" level determined by the exchange ratio between
each of them and the remaining goods. But in the present case it is the natural
exchange ratio itself which has moved against the country that refuses to pay out
gold. An "autonomous" interest policy must necessarily lead to progressive
depredation.
There are many advocates of the gold-premium policy who make no attempt to
deny that its employment in the way in which they intend must infallibly lead to a
credit-money or fiat-money standard with a rapidly falling objective exchange
value of the unit. In fact, they are inclined to regard this very fact as a special
advantage; for they are, more or less, inflationists.*94

III.20.22

Nevertheless, this was by no means the way in which the Bank of France carried
out its premium policy. It observed a fixed limit, above which it never allowed the
premium to rise in any circumstances whatever. Eight per mill is probably the
highest premium that it has ever demanded. And this was certainly not an error on
the part of the bank; it was founded on the nature of the case. In the eyes of the
French government and of the administration of the bank controlled by it, the

III.20.23

capital; it only made participation in them harder; but it did this in both directions.
Its effect, the intensity of which should not be overestimated, was principally
expressed in the fact that the rate of interest for short-term investments has been
more stable in France than in other countries. It has never sunk so low as in
England, for example; but neither has it ever risen so high. This is shown quite
dearly by a comparison of movements in the London and Paris loan rates.
It has become more and more clearly recognized that the gold-premium policy
could not have these effects ascribed to it. Those who once regarded it as the
remedy for all ills are gradually becoming silent.

III.20.24

5 Systems Similar to the Gold-Premium Policy
The legal provisions which have permitted the Bank of France to follow the goldpremium policy were absent in those countries which until recently were on a pure
gold standard. Where the gold coins have not been supplemented by any money
substitutes, fiat money, or credit money, with unlimited legal tender by any payer
including the central credit-issuing bank, the fiduciary media have had to be
redeemed at their full face value in money without a premium being charged in
addition. *95 But in actual fact these banks also were tending to adopt a policy
different in degree but certainly not in kind from the described procedure of the
Bank of France.

III.20.25

In most countries, the central bank-of-issue was only obliged to redeem its notes in
legal tender gold coins of its own country, after the pattern of English banking law.
It is in accordance with the spirit of the modern monetary system and with the
ultimate aims of monetary policy that this obligation has been understood also to
refer to the surrender of gold ingots to exporters at the legal ratio or at least at a
price that made it more profitable to procure bullion than coins. Thus until 1889 the
Bank of England voluntarily extended its obligation to redeem its notes by paying
out on demand in ingots the value of the notes in full-weight gold coins. It did this
by fixing its selling price for gold bullion once for all at 77s. 10½d. per ounce of
standard gold. *96 For a time the Continental banks-of-issue followed this example.
But they soon determined upon a different procedure, and eventually the Bank of
England too relinquished its old policy and adopted the practice of the Continental
banks.

III.20.26

The Bank of England and the German Reichsbank, apart from the Bank of France
the two most important credit-issuing banks in the world, were in the habit of
issuing for export purposes worn gold coins only of inferior value. Sovereigns, as
issued by the Bank of England for export, were usually from two to three percent
worse than newly minted sovereigns. The weight of the twenty-mark pieces
received by a person who withdrew gold coins from the German Reichsbank for
purposes of exportation was, according to the calculations of experts, 7.943 grams
on an average as against a standard average of 7.965 grams; that is, something over
a quarter of one percent less than their mint value.*97 The Bank of England
sometimes refused altogether to issue gold ingots, and sometimes would only issue
them at a price in excess of the 77s. 10½d. which alone was usual until 1889. It
sometimes raised the selling price of ingots to as much as 77s. 11d. *98

III.20.27

As regards the range and the effect of these measures, nothing need be added to
what has already been said about the French gold-premium policy. The
difference—as has been said—is only quantitative, not qualitative.*99

III.20.28

The other "little devices" which have also been employed for making the export of
gold more difficult have their effect in precisely the same fashion. As, for example,

III.20.29

gold more difficult have their effect in precisely the same fashion. As, for example,
when the German Reichsbank sometimes prohibited the issue of gold for export
purposes except in Berlin by invoking the letter of section 18 of the Bank Act,
which had the effect of making the export of gold more costly by burdening the
gold exporters with the risk and cost of transporting the gold from Berlin to the
place of export.
6 The Nonsatisfaction of the So-called Illegitimate Demand for Money
In the returns of the Bank of France it has been repeatedly asserted that the goldpremium policy was directed only against those who wished to withdraw gold from
the bank for speculative purposes. The bank, it was said, never put difficulties in
the way of procuring gold for satisfying the legitimate demands of French trade.*100
No explanation was given of the idea of "le gitimate" demand and its contrary
"illegitimate" demand.

III.20.30

The idea on which this distinction is obviously based is that trade in commodities
and dealings in capital are two perfectly distinct and independent branches of
economic activity and that it would be possible to restrict the one without affecting
the other; that refusal to surrender gold for arbitrage dealing could not increase the
expense of procuring commodities from abroad so long as no difficulty was made
about placing at the disposal of the importer the sums needed by him to pay for his
purchases.

III.20.31

On closer examination this argument can hardly be accepted as valid. Even if we
completely ignore the fact that dealings in capital only constitute one form of the
general process of exchange of goods and consider nothing beyond the technical
problem of the withdrawal of gold, it is clear that the bank cannot achieve its aim
by discriminatory treatment of different requests for gold. If exportation of gold did
not seem profitable because of the difference between the rates of interest,
imported raw materials would actually be paid for, partly or wholly, by the
commodities exported. The importer would not try to obtain gold from the bank; he
would go into the market and buy bills originating in the French export business. If
gold were delivered to him by the bank without a premium while the rate of
exchange rose roughly by the amount of and on account of the premium that was
charged to arbitrage dealers, this might well mean a favoring of the import
business, and might possibly in some circumstances benefit the consumer as well,
although that depends entirely upon the state of competition among importers. But
all the same, the rate of exchange would experience the variation that the bank
wished to avoid. The upper gold point would be fixed too high by an amount equal
to the amount of the premium.

III.20.32

Finally, it must be pointed out that the distinction between a legitimate and an
illegitimate demand for gold for export cannot be applied in practice. The demand
for gold with which to pay for imported goods may be called legitimate, the
demand for gold with which to buy foreign bills as a temporary investment with a
view to exploiting a difference in interest rates may be called illegitimate. But there
are many remaining intermediate cases, which cannot be placed in either one or the
other category. Would it have been possible, say, for the Bank of France to put
obstacles in the way of the withdrawal of deposits held by foreign states,
municipalities, and companies, perhaps as the balances of loans? Or for the AustroHungarian Bank, which has repeatedly been accused of refusing to issue bills to
persons who intend to carry out arbitrage dealings, to increase the difficulty of
speculative repurchase of home securities from abroad? *101

III.20.33

7 Other Measures for Strengthening the Stock of Metal Held by the Central
Banks-of-Issue
The endeavors of the central banks-of-issue to build up as large gold reserves as
possible have led to the employment of devices which have just the opposite
appearance to that of the premium policy and the systems similar to it. By raising
the price they paid for gold imports the banks used to try to diminish the cost to the
importer of importing gold and so to reduce the lower gold point.

III.20.34

Among these devices was the practice of granting interest-free or low-interestbearing advances to importers of gold, a practice which was not unknown in
England, France, and Germany. *102 There was also the practice of buying gold not
only at the chief office, but also at branches situated near the national boundary. *103
Perhaps the most interesting of these devices was that of buying certain kinds of
gold coin at a price in excess of their bullion value. If the bank issued to a gold
exporter, instead of ingots or coins of the country, coins of the country to which he
intended to send the gold, it could get a higher price for them than that
corresponding to their gold content. For the exporter would save the expense of
melting and recoinage and avoid the loss in which he would be involved by the fact
that the domestic coins would be worn down to some extent. So the bank would be
able to agree to pay a higher price than that corresponding to their metal content for
the current gold coins of the states into which a future export of gold was
probable.*104

III.20.35

All of these measures can best be described as weapons against the premium
policies and related devices employed by foreign banks. If the central bank in a
country A endeavored to raise the upper gold point for export from A to country B,
then the bank in B took steps to lower it. If only used coins were issued for export
purposes in A, this procedure was rendered nugatory when a price in excess of the
gold content was paid in B for coins of country A. It is very probable that the
devices and counterdevices were largely compensatory, so that the extension of the
gap between the gold points, which otherwise would necessarily have resulted from
the intervention of the banks, did not in fact occur.

III.20.36

8 The Promotion of Check and Clearing Transactions as a Means of Reducing
the Rate of Discount
In Germany, where before the war relatively very much gold was in circulation,
there was a constantly growing endeavor to withdraw it from circulation by an
extension of check and clearing transactions and to divert it into the vaults of the
Reichsbank. The aim of this propaganda is set forth in a circular of the elders of the
Kaufmannschaft of Berlin, s.d. May 2, 1907, to the following effect: "The causes to
which the high rate of interest in Germany are to be traced are rooted to a large
extent in the circumstance that the German people make greater use than those in
other countries of cash media of circulation (gold and silver) for payments arising
in and out of the course of business, but have not yet sufficiently accustomed
themselves to the procedure which might replace the use of gold and silver, and
also of banknotes and Treasury notes, as media of circulation, namely, the use of
checks and the clearing system. If a considerable proportion of payments could be
settled by means of transfers from one account to another or by checks, then this
would save large sums of currency, in gold and silver as well as in banknotes and
this saved currency would then accumulate in the reserves of the banks-of-issue,
especially of the central bank-of-issue, the Reichsbank. The more this happened,
the smaller would be the demand for currency that had to be satisfied by the
Reichsbank, and the stronger would be the cash reserve of the Reichsbank, which
circumstances would contribute considerably toward a reduction of the rate of

III.20.37

circumstances would contribute considerably toward a reduction of the rate of
interest at the Reichsbank and in the whole country."*105
In this is a very clear demonstration of the weakness of the theoretical views that
underlie modern banking policy. The level of the rate of interest is said to depend
on the demand for currency. A strengthening of the cash reserve of the central
bank-of-issue is credited with the effect of reducing the rate of interest in the whole
country, and of reducing it appreciably. And this is not just the opinion of some
private person or other, but that of the highly respected corporation of the Berlin
Kaufmannschaft, and also, as everybody knows, that of the leaders of German
economic policy in general. On this one point, all parties seem to be agreed,
however much their views on the nature of economic phenomena may otherwise
diverge. But even if this fundamental error is for a moment disregarded it is
impossible to overlook the weakness of the doctrines expounded, and, above all,
their contradictoriness. The proportion of cover for the Reichsbank notes provided
for in the banking legislation of the seventies is treated as sacrosanct. The
possibility of changing these provisions by substituting, say, a cover of one-quarter
or one-fifth for that of one-third is never contemplated. The letter of the law has to
be preserved while the assumptions on which it was based are being altered. When
money substitutes in the form of deposits are augmented without provision being
made for a monetary cover, the quantity of fiduciary media is increased. This is
further demonstrative of the fact that even that part of the argument of the banking
principle which was theoretically correct was unable to exert any influence on
practical politics. Tooke and Fullarton repeatedly point out that there is no
fundamental difference between notes and deposits (which they speak of as
checks). Their modern successors do not dare to draw the logical conclusion from
this incontrovertible fact; they stand for the differential treatment of fiduciary
media according to whether they are notes or deposits.*106

III.20.38

If part of the gold in circulation in Germany and part of the banknotes had been
replaced by fiduciary media in the shape of deposits, this might have led to a
diminution of the rate of interest only insofar as the gold that had become
superfluous was employed for obtaining capital goods from abroad. The

III.20.39

fiduciary media in circulation. It was not the legal regulations concerning cover
that forced the Reichsbank to aim at a discount polic y that would prevent any
tension from arising between the natural rate of interest and the discount rate, but
its inevitable concern for its own solvency.
In all those countries whose credit system is organized on the so-called single reserve basis so that the stock of money needed for the redemption on demand of
money substitutes is administered by a central bank on which in times of
emergency all the credit-issuing banks must ultimately fall back, it is the directors
of this bank who are the first to notice the outward flow of gold; and it is they who
must be the first to take steps to stop it, since its first effects are directed against the
institution for which they are responsible. Therefore, the raising of the discount rate
by the central bank usually precedes the increased severity of lending terms in the
open market and in the dealings between the private banks and their clients. And so
superficial critics jump to the conclusion post hoc ergo propter hoc. Nothing could
be more mistaken. Even quite apart from the proceedings of the central bank-ofissue, the private banks and others who issue money have to adjust their interest
policy to the rate of interest ruling in the world market. Sums could be withdrawn
from them for the purposes of interest arbitrage, just as from the central bank. In
fact, so long as the mobility of capital is not restricted it remains impossible for the
credit-issuing banks of any single country to follow an independent credit policy.

III.20.40

(III) Problems of Credit Policy in the
Period Immediately After the War
9 The Gold-Exchange Standard*107
Wherever inflation has thrown the monetary system into confusion, the primary
aim of currency policy has been to bring the printing presses to a standstill. Once
that is done, once it has at last been learned that even the policy of raising the
objective exchange value of money has undesirable consequences, and once it is
seen that the chief thing is to stabilize the value of money, then attempts are made
to establish a gold-exchange standard as quickly as possible. This, for example, is
what occurred in Austria at the end of 1922 and since then, at least for the time
being, the dollar rate in that country has been fixed. But in existing circumstances,
invariability of the dollar rate means invariability of the price of gold also. Thus
Austria has a dollar-exchange standard and so, indirectly, a gold-exchange
standard. That is the currency system that seems to be the immediate aim in
Germany, Poland, Hungary, and many other European countries. Nowadays,
European aspirations in the sphere of currency policy are limited to a return to the
gold standard. This is quite understandable, for the gold standard previously
functioned on the whole satisfactorily; it is true that it did not secure the
unattainable ideal of a money with an invariable objective exchange value, but it
did preserve the monetary system from the influence of governments and changing
policies.

III.20.41

Yet the gold-standard system was already undermined before the war. The first step
was the abolition of the physical use of gold in individual payments and the
accumulation of the stocks of gold in the vaults of the great banks-of-issue. The
next step was the adoption of the practice by a series of states of holding the gold
reserves of the central banks-of-issue (or the redemption funds that took their
place), not in actual gold, but in various sorts of foreign claims to gold. Thus it
came about that the greater part of the stock of gold that was used for monetary
purposes was gradually accumulated in a few large banks-of-issue; and so these
banks became the central reserve banks of the world, as previously the central
banks-of-issue had become central reserve banks for individual countries. The war

III.20.42

banks-of-issue had become central reserve banks for individual countries. The war
did not create this development; it merely hastened it a little. Neither has the
development yet reached the stage when all the newly produced gold that is not
absorbed into industrial use flows to a single center. The Bank of England and the
central banks-of-issue of some other states still control large stocks of gold; there
are still several of them that take up part of the annual output of gold. Yet
fluctuations in the price of gold are nowadays essentially dependent on the policy
followed by the Federal Reserve Board. If the United States did not absorb gold to
the extent to which it does, the price of gold would fall and the gold prices of
commodities would rise. Since, so long as the dollar represents a fixed quantity of
gold, the United States admits the surplus gold and surrenders commodities for
gold to an unlimited extent, a rapid fall in the value of gold has hitherto been
avoided. But this policy of the United States, which in volves considerable
sacrifices, might one day be changed. Variations in the price of gold would then
occur and this would be bound to give rise in other gold countries to the question
whether it would not be better in order to avoid further rises in prices to dissociate
the currency standard from gold. Just as Sweden attempted for a time to raise the
krone above its old gold parity by closing the mint time gold, so other countries
that are now still on the gold standard or intend to return to it might act similarly.
This would mean a further drop in the price of gold and a further reduction of the
usefulness of gold for monetary purposes. If we disregard the Asiatic demand for
money, we might even now without undue exaggeration say that gold has ceased to
be a commodity the fluctuations in the price of which are independent of
government influence. Fluctuations in the price of gold are nowadays substantially
dependent on the behavior of one government, namely, that of the United States.*108
All that could not have been foreseen in this result of a long process of
development is the circumstance that the fluctuations in the price of gold should
have become dependent upon the policy of one government only. That the United
States should have achieved such an economic predominance over other countries
as it now has, and that it alone of all the countries of great economic importance
should have retained the gold standard while the others (England, France,
Germany, Russia, and the rest) have at least temporarily abandoned it—that is a
consequence of what took place during the war. Yet the matter would not be
essentially different if the price of gold was dependent not on the policy of the
United States alone, but on those of four or five other governments as well. Those
protagonists of the gold-exchange standard who have recommended it as a general
monetary system and not merely as an expedient for poor countries, have
overlooked this fact. They have not observed that the gold-exchange standard must
at last mean depriving gold of that characteristic which is the most important from
the point of view of monetary policy—its independence of government influence
upon fluctuations in its value. The gold-exchange standard has not been
recommended or adopted with the object of dethroning gold. All that Ricardo
wanted was to reduce the cost of the monetary system. In many countries which
from the last decade of the nineteenth century onward have wished to abandon the
silver or credit-money standard, the gold-exchange standard rather than a gold
standard with an actual gold currency has been adopted in order to prevent the
growth of a new demand for gold from causing a rise in its price and a fall in the
gold prices of commodities. But whatever the motives may have been by which the
protagonists of the gold-exchange standard have been led, there can be no doubt
concerning the results of its increasing popularity.

III.20.43

If the gold-exchange standard is retained, the question must sooner or later arise as
to whether it would not be better to substitute for it a credit-money standard whose
fluctuations were more susceptible to control than those of gold. For if fluctuations

III.20.44

fluctuations were more susceptible to control than those of gold. For if fluctuations
in the price of gold are substantially dependent on political intervention, it is
inconceivable why government policy should still be restricted at all and not given
a free hand altogether, since the amount of this restriction is not enough to confine
arbitrariness in pric e policy within narrow limits. The cost of additional gold for
monetary purposes that is borne by the whole world might well be saved, for it no
longer secures the result of making the monetary system independent of
government intervention.
If this complete government control is not desired, there remains one alternative
only: an attempt must be made to get back from the gold-exchange standard to the
actual use of gold again.

III.20.45

10 A Return to a Gold Currency
A return to the actual use of gold would be certain to have effects that would
scarcely be welcomed. It would lead to a rise in the price of gold, or, what is the
same thing, to a fall in the prices of commodities. The fact that this is not generally
desired, and the reason why it is not, have already been dealt with. We may
confidently suppose that such a fall in prices would cause just as much
dissatisfaction as was caused by the process of expelling gold from circulation.
And it hardly demands an excessive amount of insight to be able to predict that in
such circumstances it would not be long before the gold standard was again
accused of responsibility for the bad state of business. Once again the gold standard
would be reproached with depressing prices and forcing up the rate of interest. And
once again proposals would be made for some sort of "modification" of the gold
standard. In spite of all these objections, the question of the advisability of a return
to an actual gold standard demands serious consideration.

III.20.46

One thing alone would recommend the abandonment of the gold-exchange standard
and the reintroduction of the actual use of gold; this is the necessity for making a
recurrence of inflationary policies if not impossible at least substantially more
difficult. From the end of the last century onward it was the aim of etatism in
monetary policy to restrict the actual circulation of gold for three reasons: first,
because it wished to inflate, without repealing the existing banking laws, by
concentrating gold reserves in the central bank-of-issue; second, because it wished
to accumulate a war chest; and third, because it wished to wean the people from the
use of gold coins so as to pave the way for the inflationary policy of the coming
Great War.

III.20.47

Admittedly it will not be possible to prevent either war or inflation by opposing
such endeavors as these. Kant's proposal to prohibit the raising of loans for war
purposes is extremely naive;*109 and it would be still more naive to bring within the
scope of such a prohibition the issue of fiduciary media too. Only one thing can
conquer war—that liberal attitude of mind which can see nothing in war but
destruction and annihilation, and which can never wish to bring about a war,
because it regards war as injurious even to the victors. Where liberalism prevails,
there will never be war. But where there are other opinions concerning the
profitability and injuriousness of war, no rules and regulations, however cunningly
devised, can make war impossible. If war is regarded as advantageous, then laws
regulating the monetary systems will not be allowed to stand in the way of going to
war. On the first day of any war, all the laws opposing obstacles to it will be swept

III.20.48

nevertheless be conceded that the argument in favor of making war more difficult
cannot be neglected when the question is being debated whether the actual
domestic circulation of gold should be done away with in the future or not. If the
people are accustomed to the actual use of gold in their daily affairs they will resist
an inflationary policy more strongly than did the peoples of Europe in 1914. It will
not be so easy for governments to disavow the reactions of war on the monetary
system; they will be obliged to justify their policy. The maintenance of an actual
gold currency would impose considerable costs on individual nations and would at
first lead to a general fall of prices; there can hardly be any doubt about that. But all
its disadvantages must be accepted as part of the bargain if other services are
demanded of the monetary system than that of preparing for war, revolution, and
destruction.
It is from this point of view that we should approach the question of the
denominations of notes. If the issue of notes which do not make up a multiple of at
least the smallest gold coins is prohibited, then in the business of everyday life gold
coins will have to be used. This could best be brought about by an international
currency agreement. It would be easy to force countries into such an agreement by
means of penal customs duties.

III.20.49

11 The Problem of the Freedom of the Banks
The events of recent years reopen questions that have long been regarded as closed.
The question of the freedom of the banks is one of these. It is no longer possible to
consider it completely settled as it must have been considered for decades now.
Unfortunate expe riences with banknotes that had become valueless because they
were no longer actually redeemable led once to the restriction of the right of note
issue to a few privileged institutions. Yet experience of state regulation of banksof-issue has been incomparably more unfavorable than experience of uncontrolled
private enterprise. What do all the failures of banks-of-issue and clearing banks
known to history matter in comparison with the complete collapse of the banking
system in Germany? Everything that has been said in favor of control of the
banking system pales into insignificance beside the objections that can nowadays
be advanced against state regulation of the issue of notes. The etatistic arguments,
that were once brought forward against the freedom of the note issue, no longer
carry conviction; in the sphere of banking, as everywhere else, etatism has been a
failure.

III.20.50

The safeguards erected by the liberal legislation of the nineteenth century to protect
the bank-of-issue system against abuse by the state have proved inadequate.
Nothing has been easier than to treat with contempt all the legislative provisions for
the protection of the monetary standard. All governments, even the weakest and
most incapable, have managed it without difficulty. Their banking policies have
enabled them to bring about the state of affairs that the gold standard was designed
to prevent: subjection of the value of money to the influence of political forces.
And, having arrogated this power to themselves, the governments have put it to the
worst conceivable use. But, so long as the other political and ideological factors
were what they were, we cannot conclude that the mere freedom of the banks
would or could have made things different.

III.20.51

Let us suppose that freedom of banking had prevailed throughout Europe during
the last two generations before the outbreak of the Great War; that banknotes had
not become legal tender; that notes were always examined, not only with respect to
their genuineness, but also with respect to their soundness, whenever they were
tendered, and those issued by unknown banks rejected; but that the notes of large
and well-known banking firms nevertheless were just as freely current as the notes

III.20.52

and well-known banking firms nevertheless were just as freely current as the notes
of the great central banks-of-issue in the period when they were not legal tender.
Let us further suppose that since there was no danger of a world banking cartel, the
banks had been prevented, by the mere necessity for redeeming their notes in cash,
from making immoderate endeavors to extend their issue by charging a low rate of
interest; or at least, that the risk of this was no greater than under legislative
regulation of the note system. Let us suppose, in short, that up to the outbreak of
the war, the system had worked no better and no worse than that which actually
existed. But the question at issue is whether it would have held its own any better
after July 28, 1914. The answer to this question seems to be that it would not have
done so. The governments of the belligerent—and neutral—states overthrew the
whole system of bank legislation with a stroke of the pen, and they could have
done just the same if the banks had been uncontrolled. There would have been no
necessity at all for them to proceed to issue Treasury notes. They could simply
have imposed on the banks the obligation to grant loans to the state and enabled
them to fulfill this obligation by suspending their obligation to redeem their notes
and making the notes legal tender The solution of a few minor technical problems
would have been different, but the effect would have been the same. For what
enabled the governments to destroy the banking system was not any technical,
juristic, or economic shortcoming of the banking organization, but the power
conferred on them by the general sentiment in favor of etatism and war. They were
able to dominate the monetary system because public opinion gave them the moral
right to do so. "Necessity knows no law" was the principle which served as an
excuse for all the actions of all governments alike, and not only that of Germany,
which was much blamed because of the candor with which it confessed its
adherence to the maxim.
At the most, as has been explained, an effective if limited protection against future
etatistic abuse of the banking system might be secured by prohibiting the issue of
notes of small denominations. That is to say, not by uncontrolled private enterprise
in banking, but on the contrary by interference with the freedom of the note issue.
Apart from this single prohibition, it would be quite possible to leave the note issue
without any legislative restrictions and, of course, without any legislative privileges
either, such as the granting of legal tender to the notes. Nevertheless, it is clear that
banking freedom per se cannot be said to make a return to gross inflationary policy
impossible.

III.20.53

Apart from the question of financial preparation for war, the arguments urged in
favor of the centralization, monopolization, and state control of banks-of-issue in
general and of credit-issuing banks in particular are thoroughly unsound. During
the past twenty or thirty years, the literature of banking has got so thoroughly lost
among the details of commercial technique, has so entirely abandoned the
economic point of view and so completely surrendered itself to the influence of the
most undisguised kinds of etatistic argument, that in order to discover what the
considerations are that are supposed to militate against the freedom of the banks it
is necessary to go back to the ideas that dominated the banking literature and policy
of two or three generations ago. The bank-of-issue system was then supposed to be
regulated in the interests of the poor and ignorant man in the street, so that bank
failures might not inflict loss upon those who were unskilled and unpracticed in
business matters—the laborer, the salaried employee, the civil servant, the farmer.
The argument was that such private persons should not be obliged to accept notes
whose value they were unable to test, an argument which only needs to be stated
for its utter invalidity to be apparent. No banking policy could have been more
injurious to the small man than recent etatism has been.

III.20.54

The argument, however, that was then supposed to be the decisive one was
provided by the currency principle. From the point of view of this doctrine, any
note issue that is not covered by gold is dangerous, and so, in order to obviate the
recurrence of economic crises, such issues must be restricted. On the question of
the theoretical importance of the currency principle, and on the question of whether
the means proposed by the Currency School were effective, or could have been
effective, or might still be effective, there is nothing that need be added to what has
been said already. We have already shown that the dangers envisaged by the
currency principle exist only when there is uniform procedure on the part of all the
credit-issuing banks, not merely within a given country but throughout the world.
Now the monopolization of the banks-of-issue in each separate country does not
merely fail to oppose any hindrance to this uniformity of procedure; it materially
facilitates it.

III.20.55

What was supposed to be the decisive argument against freedom of banking in the
last generation before the war is just the opposite to that which was held by the
Currency School. Before the war, state control of banking was desired with the
very object of artificially depressing the domestic rate of interest below the level
that considerations of the possibility of redemption would have dictated if the
banks had been completely free. The attempt was made to render as nugatory as
possible the obligations of cash redemption, which constitutes the foundation stone
of all credit-issuing bank systems. This was the intention of all the little expedients,
individually unimportant but cumulatively of definite if temporary effect, which it
was then customary to call banking policy. Their one intent may be summed up in
the sentence: By hook or by crook to keep the rate of discount down. They have
achieved the circumvention of all the natural and legal obstacles that hinder the
reduction of the bank rate below the natural rate of interest. In fact, the object of all
banking policy has been to escape the necessity for discount policy, an object, it is
true, which it was unable to achie ve until the outbreak of the war left the way free
for inflation.

III.20.56

If the arguments for and against state regulation of the bank-of-issue system and of
the whole system of fiduciary media are examined without the etatistic prejudice in
favor of rules and prohibitions, they can lead to no other conclusion than that of
one of the last of the defenders of banking freedom: "There is only one danger that
is peculiar to the issue of notes; that of its being released from the common-law
obligation under which everybody who enters into a commitment is strictly
required to fulfill it at all times and in all places. This danger is infinitely greater
and more threatening under a system of monopoly."*110

III.20.57

12 Fisher's Proposal for a Commodity Standard
The more the view regains ground that general business fluctuations are to be
explained by reference to the credit policy of the banks, the more eagerly are ways
sought for by which to eliminate the alternation of boom and depression in
economic life. It was the aim of the Currency School to prevent the periodical
recurrence of general economic crises by setting a maximum limit to the issue of
uncovered banknotes. An obvious further step is to close the gap that was not
reckoned with in their theory and consequently not provided for in their policy by
limiting the issue of fiduciary media in whatever form, not merely that of
banknotes. If this were done, it would no longer be possible for the credit-issuing
banks to underbid the equilibrium rate of interest and introduce into circulation
new quantities of fiduciary media with the immediate consequence of an artificial
stimulus to business and the inevitable final consequence of the dreaded economic
crisis.

III.20.58

Whether a decisive step such as this will actually be taken apparently depends upon
the kind of credit policy that is followed in the immediate future by the banks in
general and by the big central banks-of-issue in particular. It has already been
shown that it is impossible for a single bank by itself, and even for all banks in a
given country or for all the banks in several countries, to increase the issue of
fiduciary media, if the other banks do not do the same. The fact that tacit agreement
to this effect among all the credit issuing banks of the world has been achieved
only with difficulty, and, even at that, has only effected what is after all but a small
increase of credit, has constituted the most effective protection in recent times
against excesses of credit policy. In this respect, we cannot yet*111 know how
circumstances will shape. If it should prove easier now for the credit-issuing banks
to extend their circulation, then failure to adopt measures for limiting the issue of
fiduciary media will involve the greatest danger to the stability of economic life.

III.20.59

During the years immediately preceding the Great War, the objective exchange
value of gold fell continuously. From 1896 onward, the commodity price level rose
continuously. This movement, which is to be explained on the one hand by the
increased production of gold and on the other hand by the extended employment of
fiduciary media, became still more pronounced after the outbreak of the war. Gold
disappeared from circulation in a series of populous countries and flowed into the
diminishing region within which it continued to perform a monetary function as
before. Of course, this resulted in a decrease in the purchasing power of gold.
Prices rose, not only in the countries with an inflated currency, but also in the
countries that had remained on the gold standard. If the countries that nowadays
have a paper currency should return to gold, the objective exchange value of gold
would rise; the gold prices of commodities and services would fall. This effect
might be modified if the gold-exchange variety of standard were adopted instead of
a gold currency; but if the area within which gold is employed as money is to be
extended again, it is a consequence that can hardly be eliminated altogether It
would only come to stop when all countries had again adopted the gold standard.
Then perhaps the fall in the value of gold which lasted for nearly thirty years might
set in again.

III.20.60

The prospect is not a particularly pleasant one. It is hardly surprising in the
circumstances that the attention of theorists and politicians should have been
directed with special interest to a proposal that aims at nothing less than the
creation of a money with the most stable purchasing power possible.

III.20.61

The fundamental idea of Fisher's scheme for stabilizing the purchasing power of
money is the replacement of the gold standard by a "commodity" standard.
Previous proposals concerning the commodity standard have conceived it as
supplementing the precious-metal standard. Their intention has been that monetary
obligations which did not fall due until after a certain period of time should be
dischargeable, by virtue either of general compulsory legislation or of special
contractual agreements between the parties, not in the nominal sum of money to
which they referred, but by payment of that sum of money whose purchasing
power at the time when the liability was discharged was equal to the purchasing
power of the borrowed sum of money at the time when the liability was incurred.
Otherwise they have intended that the precious metal should still fulfill its
monetary office; the tabular standard was to have effect only as a standard of
deferred payments. But Fisher has more ambitious designs. His commodity
standard is not intended merely to supplement the gold standard, but to replace it
altogether. This end is to be attained by means of an ingenious combination of the
fundamental concept of the gold-exchange standard with that of the tabular
standard.

III.20.62

The money substitutes that are current under a gold-exchange standard are
redeemable either in gold or in bills on countries that are on the gold standard.
Fisher wishes to retain redemption in gold, but in such a way that the currency
units are no longer to be converted into a fixed weight of gold, but into the quantity
of gold that corresponds to the purchasing power of the monetary unit at the time of
the inauguration of the scheme. The dollar—according to the model bill worked out
by Fisher for the United States—ceases to be a fixed quantity of gold of variable
purchasing power and becomes a variable quantity of gold of invariable purchasing
power. Calculations based on price statistics are used month by month for the
construction of an index number which indicates by how much the purchasing
power of the dollar has risen or fallen in comparison with the preceding month.
Then, in accordance with this change in the value of money, the quantity of gold
that represents one dollar is increased or diminished. This is the quantity of gold for
which the dollar is to be redeemed at the banks entrusted with this function, and
this is the quantity of gold for which they have to pay out one dollar to anybody
who demands it.

III.20.63

Fisher's plan is ambitious and yet simple. Perhaps it is unnecessary to state that it is
in no way dependent upon Fisher's particular theory of money, whose inadequacy
as regards certain crucial matter has already been indicated. *112

III.20.64

There is no need to criticize Fisher's scheme again with reference to the
considerable dubiety attaching to the scientific correctness of index numbers and to
the possibility of turning them to practical account in eliminating those unintended
modifications of long-term contracts that arise from variations in the value of
money. *113 In Fisher's scheme, the function of the index number is to serve as an
indicator of variations in the purchasing power of the monetary unit from month to
month. We may suppose that for determining changes in the value of money over
very short periods—and in the present connection the month may certainly be
regarded as a very short period—index numbers could be employed with at least
sufficient exactitude for practical purposes. Yet even if we assume this, we shall
still be forced to conclude that the execution of Fisher's scheme could not in any
way ameliorate the social consequences of variations in the value of money.

III.20.65

But before we enter upon this discussion, it is pertinent to inquire what demands
the proposal makes concerning business practice.

III.20.66

If it is believed that the effects of variations in the value of money on long-term
credit transactions are compensated by variations in the rate of interest, then the
adoption of a commodity standard based on the use of index numbers as a
supplement to the gold standard must be regarded as superfluous. But, in any case,
this is certainly not true of gradual variations in the value of money of which
neither the extent nor even the direction can be foreseen; the depreciation of gold
which has gone on since toward the end of the nineteenth century has hardly found
any expression at all in variations in the rate of interest. Thus, if it were possible to
find a satisfactory solution of the problem of measuring variations in the value of
money, the adoption of a tabular for long-term credit transactions (the decision as
to the employment of the index being left to the parties to each particular contract)
could by no means be regarded as superfluous. But the technical difficulties in the
way are so great as to be insurmountable. The scientific inadequacy of all methods
of calculating index numbers means that there can be no "correct" one and
therefore none that could command general recognition. The choice among the
many possible methods which are all equally inadequate from the purely theoretical
point of view is an arbitrary one. Now since each method will yield a different
result, the opinions of debtors and creditors concerning them will differ also. The
different solutions adopted, in the law or by the administrative authority

III.20.67

different solutions adopted, in the law or by the administrative authority
responsible for calculating the index numbers, as the various problems arise will
constitute a new source of uncertainty in long-term credit transactions—an
uncertainty that might affect the foundations of credit transactions more than
variations in the value of gold would.
All this would be true of Fisher's proposals also insofar as they concern long-term
credit transactions. Insofar as they concern short-term credit transactions, it must be
pointed out that even under the present organization of the monetary system future
fluctuations of the value of money are not ignored. The difficulty about taking
account of future variations in the value of money in long-term credit transactions
lies in the impossibility of foreknowing the direction and extent of long-period
variations even with only relative certainty. But for shorter periods, over weeks and
even over periods of a few months, it is possible to a certain extent to foretell the
movement of the commodity-price level; and this movement consequently is
allowed for in all transactions involving short-term credit. The money-market rate
of interest, as the rate of interest in the market for short-term investments is called,
expresses among other things the opinion of the business world as to imminent
variations in commodity prices. It rises with the expectation of a rise in prices and
falls with the expectation of a fall in prices. In those commercial agreements in
which interest is explicitly allowed for there would be no particular difficulty under
Fisher's scheme in making the necessary adjustment of business technique; the only
adjustment that would be necessary in the new circumstances would be to leave out
of account all considerations of variations in the commodity-price level in future
calculations of the rate of interest. But the matter is somewhat more complicated in
those transactions in which an explicit rate of interest does not appear, but is
allowed for implicitly in some other terms of the agreement.

III.20.68

An example of a case of purchase on credit will assist the discussion of this point.
Let us assume that in such a case the index number over a period of five successive
months rises each month in arithmetical progression by one percent of the index
number proper to the first month, as shown in the following table:

III.20.69

Quantity of fine gold for which a
Month

Index No.

dollar may be redeemed,
in hundredths of a gram

1

100

160.0

2

101

161.6

3

102

163.2

4

103

164.8

5

104

166.4

A person who had bought commodities in February on three months' credit would
have to pay back in May .048 of a gram of fine gold for every dollar over and
above the gold content of the dollars in which he had made the bargain. Now
according to present practice, the terms of the transaction entered into in February
would make allowance for the expected general rise of prices; in the purchase then

III.20.70

would make allowance for the expected general rise of prices; in the purchase then
determined the views held by the buyer and the seller as to immediate probabilities
concerning future prices would already be expressed. Now since under Fisher's
plan the purchase price would still have to be settled by payment of the agreed
number of dollars, this rise of prices would be allowed for a second time. Clearly
this will not do. In other words, the present ordinary practice concerning purchases
on credit and other credit transactions must be modified.
All that a person will have to do after the introduction of the commodity standard,
who would have bought a commodity in January on three months' credit at $105
under a simple gold standard, is to take account of the expected fluctuations in the
value of gold in a different way in order not to buy dearer than he would have
bought in gold dollars. If he correctly foresees these fluctuations as amounting to
three dollars, then he would have to agree to pay a purchase price of only (160 ×
105)/164.8 dollars = 101.94 dollars. Fisher's project makes a different technique
necessary in business; it cannot be claimed that this technique would be any
simpler than that used under the pure gold standard. Both with and without Fisher's
plan it is necessary for buyers and sellers to allow for variations in the general level
of prices as well as for the particular variations in the prices of the commodities in
which they deal; the only difference is in the method by which they evaluate the
result of their speculative opinion.

III.20.71

We can thus see what value Fisher's scheme has as far as the consequences of
variations in the value of money arising in connection with credit transactions are
concerned. For long-term credit transactions, in which Fisher's scheme is no
advance on the old and oft-discussed tabular standard which has never been put
into execution because of its disadvantages, the use of the commodity standard as a
supplement to the gold standard is impracticable because of the fundamental
inadequacy of all methods of calculating index numbers. For short-term credit
transactions, in which variations in the value of money are already taken account of
in a different way, it is superfluous.

III.20.72

But variations in the objective exchange value of money have another kind of
social consequence, arising from the fact that they are not expressed simultaneously
and uniformly with regard to all commodities and services. Fisher's scheme
promises no relief at all from consequences of this sort; Fisher, indeed, never refers
to this kind of consequence of variations in the value of money and seems to be
aware only of such effects as arise from their reactions on debt relationships
contracted in terms of money.

III.20.73

However it may be calculated, an index number expresses nothing but an average

III.20.74

to occur simultaneously and uniformly in relation to all other economic goods.
Thus, the social consequences of variations in the value of money could not be
done away with even with the help of Fisher's commodity standard.

III.20.75

13 The Basic Questions of Future Currency Policy
Irving Fisher's scheme is symptomatic of a tendency in contemporary currency
policy which is antipathetic to gold. There is an inclination in the United States and
in Anglo-Saxon countries generally to overestimate in a quite extraordinary manner
the signifi cance of index methods. In these countries, it is entirely overlooked that
the scientific exactness of these methods leaves much to be desired, that they can
never yield anything more than a rough result at best, and that the question whether
one or other method of calculation is preferable can never be solved by scientific
means. The question of which method is preferred is always a matter for political
judgment. It is a serious error to fall into to imagine that the methods suggested by
monetary theorists and currency statisticians can yield unequivocal results that will
render the determination of the value of money independent of the political
decisions of the governing parties. A monetary system in which variations in the
value of money and commodity prices are controlled by the figure calculated from
price statistics is not in the slightest degree less dependent upon government
influences than any other sort of monetary system in which the government is able
to exert an influence on values.

III.20.76

There can be no doubt that the present state of the market for gold makes a decision
between two possibilities imperative: a return to the actual use of gold after the
fashion of the English gold standard of the nineteenth century, or a transition to a
fiat-money standard with purchasing power regulated according to index numbers.
The gold-exchange standard might be considered as a possible basis for future
currency systems only if an international agreement could impose upon each state
the obligation to maintain a stock of gold of a size corresponding to its capacity. A
gold-exchange standard with a redemption fund chiefly invested in foreign bills in
gold currencies is in the long run not a practicable general solution of the problem.

III.20.77

The first German edition of this work, published in 1912, concluded with an
attempt at a glimpse into the future history of money and credit. The important
parts of its argument ran as follows:

III.20.78

"It has gradually become recognized as a fundamental principle of monetary policy

III.20.79

prohibition.
"At first it might appear as if the execution of such radical measures would be
bound to lead to a rise in the objective exchange-value of money. But this is not
necessarily the case. It is not improbable that the production of gold and the
increase in the issue of bank credit are at present increasing considerably faster
than the demand for money and are consequently leading to a steady diminution of
the objective exchange value of money. And there can be no doubt that a similar
result follows from the apparently one-sided fixing of prices by sellers, the effect of
which in diminishing the value of money has already been examined in detail. The
complaints about the general increase in the cost of living, which will continue for
a long time yet, may serve as a confirmation of the correctness of this assumption,
which can be neither confirmed nor refuted statistically. Thus, a restriction of the
growth of the stock of money in the broader sense need not unconditionally lead to
a rise in the purchasing power of the monetary unit; it is possible that it might have
the effect of completely or partly counteracting the fall in the value of money
which might otherwise have occurred.

III.20.80

"It is not entirely out of the question that the monetary and credit policy of the
future will attempt to check any further fall in the objective exchange value of
money. Large classes of the population—wage and salary earners—feel that the
continuous fall in the value of money is unjust. It is most certain that any proposals
that promise them any relief in this direction will receive their warmest support.
What these proposals will be like, and how far they will go, are matters that it is
difficult to foresee. In any case, economists are not called upon to act as prophets."

III.20.81

Elsewhere in the course of the argument it was claimed that it would be useless to
try and improve the monetary system at all in the way envisaged by the tabular
standard. "We must abandon all attempts to render the organization of the market
even more perfect than it is and content ourselves with what has been attained
already; or rather, we must strive to retain what has been attained already; and that
is not such an easy matter as it seems to appear to those who have been more
concerned to improve the apparatus of exchange than to note the dangers that
implied its maintenance at its present level of perfection.

III.20.82

"It would be a mistake to assume that the modern organization of exchange is
bound to continue to exist. It carries within itself the germ of its own destruction;
the development of the fiduciary medium must necessarily lead to its breakdown.
Once common principles for their circulation-credit policy are agreed to by the
different credit-issuing banks, or once the multiplicity of credit-issuing banks is
replaced by a single world bank, there will no longer be any limit to the issue of
fiduciary media. At first, it will be possible to increase the issue of fiduciary media
only until the objective exchange value of money is depressed to the level
determined by the other possible uses of the monetary metal. But in the case of fiat
money and credit money there is no such limit, and even in the case of commodity
money it cannot prove impassable. For once the employment of money substitutes
has superseded the employment of money for actual employment in exchange
transactions mediated by money, and we are by no means very far from this state of
affairs, the moment the limit was passed the obligation to redeem the money
substitutes would be removed and so the transition to bank-credit money would
easily be completed. Then the only limit to the issue would be constituted by the
technical costs of the banking business. In any case, long before these limits are
reached, the consequences of the increase in the issue of fiduciary media will make
themselves felt acutely."

III.20.83

Since then we have experienced the collapse, sudden enough, of the monetary
systems in a whole series of European states. The inflation of the war and postwar
periods, exceeding everything that could have been foreseen, has created an
unexampled chaos. Now we are on the way to mastering this chaos and to returning
to a new organization of the monetary system which will be all the better the less it
differs from the system in force before the war.

III.20.84

The organization of exchange that will thus be achieved again will exhibit all the
shortcomings that have continually been referred to with emphasis throughout the
present book. It will be a task for the future to erect safeguards against the
inflationary misuse of the monetary system by the government and against the
extension of the circulation of fiduciary media by the banks.

III.20.85

Yet such safeguards alone will not suffice to avert the dangers that menace the
peaceful development of the function of money and fiduciary media in facilitating
exchange. Money is part of the mechanism of the free market in a social order
based on private property in the means of production. Only where political forces
are not antagonistic to private property in the means of production is it possible to
work out a policy aiming at the greatest possible stability of the objective exchange
value of money.

PART FOUR
MONETARY RECONSTRUCTION
(This part was written in 1952 and
first appeared in the 1953 American
edition of Yale University Press)

CHAPTER 21
The Principle of Sound Money
1 The Classical Idea of Sound Money
The principle of sound money that guided nineteenth-century monetary doctrines
and policies was a product of classical political economy. It was an essential part of
the liberal program as developed by eighteenth-century social philosophy and
propagated in the following century by the most influential political parties of
Europe and America.

IV.21.1

The liberal doctrine sees in the market economy the best, even the only possible,
system of economic organization of society. Private ownership of the means of
production tends to shift control of production to the hands of those best fitted for
this job and thus to secure for all members of society the fullest possible
satisfaction of their needs. It assigns to the consumers the power to choose those
purveyors who supply them in the cheapest way with the articles they are most
urgently asking for and thus subjects the entrepreneurs and the owners of the means
of production, namely, the capitalists and the landowners, to the sovereignty of the
buying public. It makes nations and their citizens free and provides ample
sustenance for a steadily increasing population.

IV.21.2

As a system of peaceful cooperation under the division of labor, the market
economy could not work without an institution warranting to its members
protection against domestic gangsters and external foes. Violent aggression can be
thwarted only by armed resistance and repression. Society needs an apparatus of
defense, a state, a government, a police power. Its undisturbed functioning must be
safeguarded by continuous preparedness to repel aggressors. But then a new danger
springs up. How keep under control the men entrusted with the handling of the
government apparatus lest they turn their weapons against those whom they were
expected to serve? The main political problem is how to prevent the rulers from
becoming despots and enslaving the citizenry. Defense of the individual's liberty
against the encroachment of tyrannical governments is the essential theme of the
history of Western civilization. The characteristic feature of the Occident is its
peoples' pursuit of liberty, a concern unknown to Orientals. All the marvelous
achievements of Western civilization are fruits grown on the tree of liberty.

IV.21.3

It is impossible to grasp the meaning of the idea of sound money if one does not
realize that it was devised as an instrument for the protection of civil liberties
against despotic inroads on the part of governments. Ideologically it belongs in the
same class with political constitutions and bills of rights. The demand for
constitutional guarantees and for bills of rights was a reaction against arbitrary rule
and the nonobservance of old customs by kings. The postulate of sound money was
first brought up as a response to the princely practice of debasing the coinage. It

IV.21.4

first brought up as a response to the princely practice of debasing the coinage. It
was later carefully elaborated and perfected in the age which—through the
experience of the American continental currency, the paper money of the French
Revolution and the British restriction period—had learned what a government can
do to a nation's currency system.
Modern cryptodespotism, which arrogates to itself the name of liberalism, finds
fault with the negativity of the concept of freedom. The censure is spurious as it
refers merely to the grammatical form of the idea and does not comprehend that all
civil rights can be as well defined in affirmative as in negative terms. They are
negative as they are designed to obviate an evil, namely omnipotence of the police
power, and to prevent the state from becoming totalitarian. They are affirmative as
they are designed to preserve the smooth operation of the system of private
property, the only social system that has brought about what is called civilization.

IV.21.5

Thus the sound-money principle has two aspects. It is affirmative in approving the
market's choice of a commonly used medium of exchange. It is negative in
obstructing the government's propensity to meddle with the currency system.

IV.21.6

The sound-money principle was derived not so much from the Classical
economists' analysis of the market phenomena as from their interpretation of
historical experience. It was an experience that could be perceived by a much larger
public than the narrow circles of those conversant with economic theory. Hence the
sound-money idea became one of the most popular points of the liberal program.
Friends and foes of liberalism considered it one of the essential postulates of a
liberal policy.

IV.21.7

Sound money meant a metallic standard. Standard coins should be in fact a definite
quantity of the standard metal as precisely determined by the law of the country.
Only standard coins should have unlimited legal-tender quality. Token coins and
all kinds of moneylike paper should be, on presentation and without delay,
redeemed in lawful standard money.

IV.21.8

So far there was unanimity among the supporters of sound money. But then the
battle of the standards arose. The defeat of those favoring silver and the
unfeasibility of bimetallism eventually made the sound-money principle mean the
gold standard. At the end of the nineteenth century there was all over the world
unanimity among businessmen and statesmen with regard to the indispensability of
the gold standard. Countries which were under a fiat-money system or under the
silver standard considered adoption of the gold standard the foremost goal of their
economic policy. Those who disputed the eminence of the gold standard were
dismissed as cranks by the representatives of the official doctrine—professors,
bankers, statesmen, editors of the great newspapers and magazines.

IV.21.9

It was a serious blunder of the supporters of sound money to adopt such tactics.
There is no use in dealing in a summary way with any ideology however foolish
and contradictory it may appear Even a manifestly erroneous doctrine should be
refuted by careful analysis and the unmasking of the fallacie s implied. A sound
doctrine can win only by exploding the delusions of its adversaries.

IV.21.10

The essential principles of the sound-money doctrine were and are impregnable.
But their scientific support in the last decades of the nineteenth century was rather
shaky. The attempts to demonstrate their reasonableness from the point of view of
the Classical value theory were not very convincing and made no sense at all when
this value concept had to be discarded. But the champions of the new value theory
for almost half a century restricted their studies to the problems of direct exchange

IV.21.11

for almost half a century restricted their studies to the problems of direct exchange
and left the treatment of money and banking to routinists unfamiliar with
economics. There were treatises on catallactics which dealt only incidentally and
cursorily with monetary matters, and there were books on currency and banking
which did not even attempt to integrate their subject into the structure of a
catallactic system. *1 Finally the idea evolved that the modern doctrine of value, the
subjectivist or marginal utility doctrine, is unable to explain the problems of
money's purchasing power.*2
It is easy to comprehend how under such circumstances even the least tenable
objections raised by the advocates of inflationism remained unanswered. The gold
standard lost popularity because for a very long time no serious attempts were
made to demonstrate its merits and to explode the tenets of its adversaries.

IV.21.12

2 The Virtues and Alleged Shortcomings of the Gold Standard
The excellence of the gold standard is to be seen in the fact that it renders the
determination of the monetary unit's purchasing power independent of the policies
of governments and political parties. Furthermore, it prevents rulers from eluding
the financial and budgetary prerogatives of the representative assemblies.
Parliamentary control of finances works only if the government is not in a position
to provide for unauthorized expenditures by increasing the circulating amount of
fiat money. Viewed in this light, the gold standard appears as an indispensable
implement of the body of constitutional guarantees that make the system of
representative government function.

IV.21.13

When in the 1850s gold production increased considerably in California and
Australia, people attacked the gold standard as inflationary. In those days Michel
Chevalier, in his book Probable Depreciation of Gold, recommended the
abandonment of the gold standard, and Béranger dealt with the same subject in one
of his poems. But later these criticisms subsided. The gold standard was no longer
denounced as inflationary but on the contrary as deflationary. Even the most
fanatical champions of inflation like to disguise their true intentions by declaring
that they merely want to offset the contractionist pressure which the allegedly
insufficient supply of gold tends to produce.

IV.21.14

Yet it is clear that over the last generations there has prevailed a tendency of all
commodity prices and wage rates to rise. We may neglect dealing with the
economic effects of a general tendency of money prices and money wages to
drop. *3 For there is no doubt that what we have experienced over the last hundred
years was just the opposite, namely, a secular tendency toward a drop in the
monetary unit's purchasing power, which was only temporarily interrupted by the
aftermath of the breakdown of a boom intentionally created by credit expansion.
Gold became cheaper in terms of commodities, not dearer. What the foes of the
gold standard are asking for is not to reverse a prevailing tendency in the
determination of prices, but to intensify very considerably the already prevailing
upward trend of prices and wages. They simply want to lower the monetary unit's
purchasing power at an accelerated pace.

IV.21.15

Such a policy of radical inflationism is, of course, extremely popular. But its
popularity is to a great extent due to a misapprehension of its effects. What people
are really asking for is a rise in the prices of those commodities and services they
are selling while the prices of those commodities and services which they are

IV.21.16

sooner or in greater proportion than the price of potatoes. If a politician addressing
a meeting declares that the government should adopt a policy which makes prices
rise, his hearers are likely to applaud. Yet each of them is thinking of a different
price rise.
From time immemorial inflation has been recommended as a means to alleviate the
burdens of poor worthy debtors at the expense of rich harsh creditors. However,
under capitalism the typical debtors are not the poor but the well-to-do owners of
real estate, of firms, and of common stock, people who have borrowed from banks,
savings banks, insurance companies, and bondholders. The typical creditors are not
the rich but people of modest means who own bonds and savings accounts or have
taken out insurance policies. If the common man supports anticreditor measures, he
does it because he ignores the fact that he himself is a creditor. The idea that
millionaires are the victims of an easy-money policy is an atavistic remnant.

IV.21.17

For the naive mind there is something miraculous in the issuance of fiat money. A
magic word spoken by the government creates out of nothing a thing which can be
exchanged against any merchandise a man would like to get. How pale is the art of
sorcerers, witches, and conjurors when compared with that of the government's
Treasury Department! The government, professors tell us, "can raise all the money
it needs by printing it."*4 Taxes for revenue, announced a chairman of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, are "obsolete."*5 How wonderful! And how malicious
and misanthropic are those stubborn supporters of outdated economic orthodoxy
who ask governments to balance their budgets by covering all expenditures out of
tax revenue!

IV.21.18

These enthusiasts do not see that the working of inflation is conditioned by the
ignorance of the public and that inflation ceases to work as soon as the many
become aware of its effects upon the monetary unit's purchasing power. In normal
times, that is in periods in which the government does not tamper with the
monetary standard, people do not bother about monetary problems. Quite naively
they take it for granted that the monetary unit's purchasing power is "stable." They
pay attention to changes occurring in the money prices of the various commodities.
They know very well that the exchange ratios between different commodities vary.
But they are not conscious of the fact that the exchange ratio between money on the
one side and all commodities and services on the other side is variable too. When
the inevitable consequences of inflation appear and prices soar, they think that
commodities are becoming dearer and fail to see that money is getting cheaper. In
the early stages of an inflation only a few people discern what is going on, manage
their business affairs in accordance with this insight, and deliberately aim at
reaping inflation gains. The overwhelming majority are too dull to grasp a correct
interpretation of the situatio n. They go on in the routine they acquired in
noninflationary periods. Filled with indignation, they attack those who are quicker
to apprehend the real causes of the agitation of the market as "profiteers" and lay
the blame for their own plight on them. This ignorance of the public is the
indispensable basis of the inflationary policy. Inflation works as long as the
housewife thinks: "I need a new frying pan badly. But prices are too high today; I
shall wait until they drop again." It comes to an abrupt end when people discover
that the inflation will continue, that it causes the rise in prices, and that therefore
prices will skyrocket infinitely. The critical stage begins when the housewife
thinks: "I don't need a new frying pan today; I may need one in a year or two. But
I'll buy it today because it will be much more expensive later." Then the
catastrophic end of the inflation is close. In its last stage the housewife thinks: "I
don't need another table; I shall never need one. But it's wiser to buy a table than
keep these scraps of paper that the government calls money, one minute longer."

IV.21.19

Let us leave the problem of whether or not it is advisable to base a system of
government finance upon the intentional deception of the immense majority of the
citizenry. It is enough to stress the point that such a policy of deceit is selfdefeating. Here the famous dictum of Lincoln holds true: You can't fool all of the
people all of the time. Eventually the masses come to understand the schemes of
their rulers. Then the cleverly concocted plans of inflation collapse. Whatever
compliant government economists may have said, inflationism is not a monetary
policy that can be considered as an alternative to a sound-money policy. It is at best
a temporary expedient. The main problem of an inflationary policy is how to stop it
before the masses have seen through their rulers' artifices. It is a display of
considerable naivety to recommend openly a monetary system that can work only if
its essential features are ignored by the public.

IV.21.20

The index-number method is a very crude and imperfect means of "measuring"
changes occurring in the monetary unit's purchasing power. As there are in the field
of social affairs no constant relations between magnitudes, no measurement is
possible and economics can never become quantitative.*6 But the index-number
method, notwithstanding its inadequacy, plays an important role in the process
which in the course of an inflationary movement makes the people inflationconscious. Once the use of index numbers becomes common, the government is
forced to slow down the pace of the inflation and to make the people believe that
the inflationary policy is merely a temporary expedient for the duration of a passing
emergency, one that will be stopped before long. While government economists
still praise the superiority of inflation as a lasting scheme of monetary
management, governments are compelled to exercise restraint in its application.

IV.21.21

It is permissible to call a policy of intentional inflation dishonest as the effects
sought by its application can be attained only if the government succeeds in
deceiving the greater part of the people about the consequences of its policy. Many
of the champions of interventionist policies will not scruple greatly about such
cheating; in their eyes what the government does can never be wrong. But their
lofty moral indifference is at a loss to oppose an objection to the economist's
argument against inflation. In the economist's eyes the main issue is not that
inflation is morally reprehensible but that it cannot work except when resorted to
with great restraint and even then only for a limited period. Hence resort to
inflation cannot be considered seriously as an alternative to a permanent standard
such as the gold standard is.

IV.21.22

The proinflationist propaganda emphasizes nowadays the alleged fact that the gold
standard collapsed and that it will never be tried again: nations are no longer
willing to comply with the rules of the gold-standard game and to bear all the costs
which the preservation of the gold standard requires.

IV.21.23

First of all there is need to remember that the gold standard did not collapse.
Governments abolished it in order to pave the way for inflation. The whole grim
apparatus of oppression and coercion—policemen, customs guards, penal courts,
prisons, in some countries even executioners—had to be put into action in order to
destroy the gold standard. Solemn pledges were broken, retroactive laws were
promulgated, provisions of constitutions and bills of rights were openly defied.
And hosts of servile writers praised what the governments had done and hailed the
dawn of the fiat-money millennium.

IV.21.24

The most remarkable thing about this allegedly new monetary policy, however, is
its complete failure. True, it substituted fiat money in the domestic markets for
sound money and favored the material interests of some individuals and groups of
individuals at the expense of others. It furthermore contributed considerably to the

IV.21.25

individuals at the expense of others. It furthermore contributed considerably to the
disintegration of the international division of labor. But it did not succeed in
eliminating gold from its position as the international or world standard. If you
glance at the financial page of any newspaper you discover at once that gold is still
the world's money and not the variegated products of the divers government
printing offices. These scraps of paper are the more appreciated the more stable
their price is in terms of an ounce of gold. Whoever today dares to hint at the
possibility that nations may return to a domestic gold standard is cried down as a
lunatic. This terrorism may still go on for some time. But the position of gold as the
world's standard is impregnable. The policy of "going off the gold standard" did not
relieve a country's monetary authorities from the necessity of taking into account
the monetary unit's price in terms of gold.
What those authors who speak about the rules of the gold-standard game have in
mind is not clear. Of course, it is obvious that the gold standard cannot function
satisfactorily if to buy or to sell or to hold gold is illegal, and hosts of judges,
constables, and informers are busily enforcing the law. But the gold standard is not
a game; it is a market phenomenon and as such a social institution. Its preservation
does not depend on the observation of some specific rules. It requires nothing else
than that the government abstain from deliberately sabotaging it. To refer to this
condition as a rule of an alleged game is no more reasonable than to declare that the
pres ervation of Paul's life depends on compliance with the rules of the Paul's-life
game because Paul must die if somebody stabs him to death.

IV.21.26

What all the enemies of the gold standard spurn as its main vice is precisely the
same thing that in the eyes of the advocates of the gold standard is its main virtue,
namely, its incompatibility with a policy of credit expansion. The nucleus of all the
effusions of the antigold authors and politicians is the expansionist fallacy.

IV.21.27

The expansionist doctrine does not realize that interest, that is, the discount of
future goods as against present goods, is an originary category of human valuation,
actual in any kind of human action and independent of any social institutions. The
expansionists do not grasp the fact that there never were and there never can be
human beings who attach to an apple available in a year or in a hundred years the
same value they attach to an apple available now. In their opinion interest is an
impediment to the expansion of production and consequently to human welfare that
unjustified institutions have created in order to favor the selfish concerns of money
lenders. Interest, they say, is the price people must pay for borrowing. Its height
therefore depends on the magnitude of the supply of money. If laws did not
artificially restrict the creation of additional money, the rate of interest would drop,
ultimately even to zero. The "contractionist" pressure would disappear, there would
no longer be a shortage of capital, and it would become possible to execute many
business projects which the "restrictionism" of the gold standard obstructs. What is
needed to make everyone prosperous is simply to defy "the rules of the goldstandard game," the observance of which is the main source of all our economic
ills.

IV.21.28

These absurd doctrines greatly impressed ignorant politicians and demagogues
when they were blended with nationalist slogans. What prevents our country from
fully enjoying the advantages of a low-interest-rate policy, says the economic
isolationist, is its adherence to the gold standard. Our central bank is forced to keep
its rate of discount at a height that corresponds to conditions on the international

IV.21.29

central bank drop below the legal ratio. If our central bank were not obliged to
redeem its banknotes in gold, no such withdrawal of gold could occur and there
would be no necessity for it to adjust the height of the money rate to the situation of
the international money market, dominated by the world-embracing gold
monopoly.
The most amazing fact about this argument is that it was raised precisely in debtor
countries for which the operation of the international money and capital market
meant an inflow of foreign funds and consequently the appearance of a tendency
toward a drop in interest rates. It was popular in Germany and still more in Austria
in the 1870s and 80s, but it was hardly ever seriously mentioned in those years in
England or in the Netherlands, whose banks and bankers lent amply to Germany
and Austria. It was advanced in England only after World War I, when Great
Britain's position as the world's banking center had been lost.

IV.21.30

Of course, the argument itself is untenable. The inevitable eventual failure of any
attempt at credit expansion is not caused by the international intertwinement of the
lending business. It is the outcome of the fact that it is impossible to substitute fiat
money and a bank's circulation credit for nonexisting capital goods. Credit
expansion initially can produce a boom. But such a boom is bound to end in a
slump, in a depression. What bring about the recurrence of periods of economic
crises are precisely the reiterated attempts of governments and banks supervised by
them to expand credit in order to make business good by cheap interest rates. *7

IV.21.31

3 The Full-Employment Doctrine
The inflationist or expansionist doctrine is presented in several varieties. But its
essential content remains always the same.

IV.21.32

The oldest and most naive version is that of the allegedly insufficient supply of
money. Business is bad, says the grocer, because my customers or prospective
customers do not have enough money to expand their purchases. So far he is right.
But when he adds that what is needed to render his business more prosperous is to
increase the quantity of money in circulation, he is mistaken. What he really has in
mind is an increase of the amount of money in the pockets of his customers and
prospective customers while the amount of money in the hands of other people
remains unchanged. He asks for a specific kind of inflation; namely, an inflatio n in
which the additional new money first flows into the cash holdings of a definite
group of people, his customers, and thus permits him to reap inflation gains. Of
course, everybody who advocates inflation does it because he infers that he will
belong to those who are favored by the fact that the prices of the commodities and
services they sell will rise at an earlier date and to a higher point than the prices of
those commodities and services they buy. Nobody advocates an inflation in which
he would be on the losing side.

IV.21.33

This spurious grocer philosophy was once and for all exploded by Adam Smith and
Jean-Baptiste Say. In our day it has been revived by Lord Keynes, and under the
name of full-employment policy is one of the basic policies of all governments
which are not entirely subject to the Soviets. Yet Keynes was at a loss to advance a
tenable argument against Say's law. Nor have his disciples or the hosts of
economists, pseudo and other, in the offices of the various governments, the United
Nations, and divers other national or international bureaus done any better. The
fallacies implied in the Keynesian full-employment doctrine are, in a new attire,
essentially the same errors which Smith and Say long since demolished.

IV.21.34

Wage rates are a market phenomenon, are the prices paid for a definite quantity of
labor of a definite quality. If a man cannot sell his labor at the price he would like
to get for it, he must lower the price he is asking for it or else he remains
unemployed. If the government or labor unions fix wage rates at a higher point than
the potential rate of the unhampered labor market and if they enforce their
minimum-price decree by compulsion and coercion, a part of those who want to
find jobs remain unemployed. Such institutional unemployment is the inevitable
result of the methods applied by present-day self-styled progressive governments.
It is the real outcome of measures falsely labeled prolabor. There is only one
efficacious way toward a rise in real wage rates and an improvement of the
standard of living of the wage earners: to increase the per-head quota of capital
invested. This is what laissez-faire capitalism brings about to the extent that its
operation is not sabotaged by government and labor unions.

IV.21.35

We do not need to investigate whether the politicians of our age are aware of these
facts. In most universities it is not good form to mention them to the students.
Books that are skeptical with regard to the official doctrines are not widely bought
by the libraries or used in courses, and consequently publishers are afraid to
publish them. Newspapers seldom criticize the popular creed because they fear a
boycott on the part of the unions. Thus politicians may be utterly sincere in
believing that they have won "social gains" for the "people" and that the spread of
unemployment is one of the evils inherent in capitalism and is in no way caused by
the policies of which they are boasting. However this may be, it is obvious that the
reputation and the prestige of the men who are now ruling the countries outside the
Soviet bloc and of their professorial and journalistic allies are so inseparably tied
up with the "progressive" doctrine that they must cling to it. If they do not want to
forsake their politic al ambitions, they must stubbornly deny that their own policy
tends to make mass unemployment a permanent phenomenon and must try to put
on capitalism the blame for the undesired effects of their procedures.

IV.21.36

The most characteristic feature of the full-employment doctrine is that it does not
provide information about the way in which wage rates are determined on the
market. To discuss the height of wage rates is taboo for the "progressives." When
they deal with unemployment, they do not refer to wage rates. As they see it, the
height of wage rates has nothing to do with unemployment and must never be
mentioned in connection with it.

IV.21.37

If there are unemployed, says the progressive doctrine, the government must
increase the amount of money in circulation until full employment is reached. It is,
they say, a serious mistake to call inflation an increase in the quantity of money in
circulation effected under these conditions. It is just "full-employment policy."

IV.21.38

We may refrain from frowning upon this terminological oddity of the doctrine. The
main point is that every increase in the quantity of money in circulation brings
about a tendency of prices and wages to rise. If, in spite of the rise of commodity
prices, wage rates do not rise at all or if their rise lags sufficiently behind the rise in
commodity prices, the number of people unemployed on account of the height of
wage rates will drop. But it will drop merely because such a configuration of
commodity prices and wage rates means a drop in real wage rates. In order to attain
this result it would not have been necessary to embark upon increasing the amount
of money in circulation. A reduction in the height of the minimum-wage rates
enforced by the government or union pressure would have achieved the same effect
without at the same time starting all the other consequences of an inflation.

IV.21.39

It is a fact that in some countries in the 1930s, recourse to inflation was not
immediately followed by a rise in the height of money wage rates as fixed by the

IV.21.40

immediately followed by a rise in the height of money wage rates as fixed by the
governments or unions, that this was tantamount to a drop in real wage rates, and
that consequently the number of unemployed decreased. But this was merely a
passing phenomenon. When in 1936 Lord Keynes declared that a movement of
employers to revise money-wage bargains downward would be much more
strongly resisted than a gradual and "automatic" lowering of real wage rates as a
result of rising prices,*8 he had already been outdated and refuted by the march of
events. The masses had already begun to see through the artifices of inflation.
Problems of purchasing power and index numbers became an important issue in the
unions' dealings with wage rates. The full-employment argument in favor of
inflation was already behind the times at the very moment when Keynes and his
followers proclaimed it as the fundamental principle of progressive economic
policies.
4 The Emergency Argument in Favor of Inflation
All the economic arguments in favor of inflation are untenable. The fallacies have
long since been exploded in an irrefutable way.

IV.21.41

There is, however, a political argument in favor of inflation that requires special
analysis. This polit ical argument is only rarely resorted to in books, articles, and
political speeches. It does not lend itself to such public treatment. But the
underlying idea plays an important role in the thinking of statesmen and historians.

IV.21.42

Its supporters fully accept all the teachings of the sound-money doctrine. They do
not share the errors of the inflationist quacks. They realize that inflationism is a
self-defeating policy which must inevitably lead to an economic cataclysm and that
all its allegedly beneficial effects are, even from the point of view of the authors of
the inflationary policy, more undesirable than the evils which were to be cured by
inflation. In full awareness of all this, however, they still believe that there are
emergencies which peremptorily require or at least justify recourse to inflation. A
nation, they say, can be menaced by evils which are incomparably more disastrous
than the effects of inflation. If it is possible to avoid the total annihilation of a
nation's freedom and cult ure by a temporary abandonment of sound money, no
reasonable objection can be raised against such a procedure. It would simply mean
preferring a smaller evil to a greater one.

IV.21.43

In order to appraise correctly the weight of this emergency argument in favor of
inflation, there is need to realize that inflation does not add anything to a nation's
power of resistance, either to its material resources or to its spiritual and moral
strength. Whether there is inflation or not, the material equipment required by the
armed forces must be provided out of the available means by restricting
consumption for nonvital purposes, by intensifying production in order to increase
output, and by consuming a part of the capital previously accumulated. All these
things can be done if the majority of citizens are firmly resolved to offer resistance
to the best of their abilities and are prepared to make such sacrifices for the sake of
preserving their independence and culture. Then the legislature will adopt fiscal
methods which warrant the achievement of these goals. They will attain what is
called economic mobilization or a defense economy without tampering with the
monetary system. The great emergency can be dealt with without recourse to
inflation.

IV.21.44

But the situation those advocating emergency inflation have in mind is of a quite
different character. Its characteristic feature is an irreconcilable antagonism
between the opinions of the government and those of the majority of the people.
The government, in this regard supported by only a minority of the people, believes

IV.21.45

The government, in this regard supported by only a minority of the people, believes
that there exists an emergency that necessitates a considerable increase in public
expenditure and a corresponding austerity in private households. But the majority
of the people disagree. They do not believe that conditions are so bad as the
government depicts them or they think that the preservation of the values
endangered is not worth the sacrifices they would have to make. There is no need
to raise the question whether the government's or the majority's opinion is right.
Perhaps the government is right. However, we deal not with the substance of the
conflict but with the methods chosen by the rulers for its solution. They reject the
democratic way of persuading the majority. They arrogate to themselves the power
and the moral right to circumvent the will of the people. They are eager to win its
cooperation by deceiving the public about the costs involved in the measures
suggested. While seemingly complying with the constitutional procedures of
representative government, their conduct is in effect not that of elected
officeholders but that of guardians of the people. The elected executive no longer
deems himself the people's mandatory; he turns into a führer.
The emergency that brings about inflation is this: the people or the majority of the
people are not prepared to defray the costs incurred by their rulers' policies. They
support these policies only to the extent that they believe their conduct does not
burden themselves. They vote, for instance, only for such taxes as are to be paid by
other people, namely, the rich, because they think that these taxes do not impair
their own material well-being. The reaction of the government to this attitude of the
nation is, at least sometimes, directed by the sincere wish to serve what it believes
to be the true interests of the people in the best possible way. But if the government
resorts for this purpose to inflation, it is employing methods which are contrary to
the principles of representative government, although formally it may have fully
complied with the letter of the constitution. It is taking advantage of the masses'
ignorance, it is cheating the voters instead of trying to convince them.

IV.21.46

It is not just an accident that in our age inflation has become the accepted method
of monetary management. Inflation is the fiscal complement of statism and
arbitrary government. It is a cog in the complex of policies and institutions which
gradually lead toward totalitarianism.

IV.21.47

Western liberty cannot hold its ground against the onslaughts of Oriental slavery if
the peoples do not realize what is at stake and are not ready to make the greatest
sacrifices for the ideals of their civilization. Recourse to inflation may provide the
government with the funds which it could neither collect by taxation nor borrow
from the savings of the public because the people and its parliamentary
representatives objected. Spending the newly created fiat money, the government
can buy the equipment the armed forces need. But a nation reluctant to make the
material sacrifices necessary for victory will never display the requisite mental
energy. What warrants success in a fight for freedom and civilization is not merely
material equipment but first of all the spirit that animates those handling the
weapons. This heroic spirit cannot be bought by inflation.

CHAPTER 22
Contemporary Currency Systems
1 The Inflexible Gold Standard
The mark of all the varieties of the gold standard and the gold-exchange standard as
they existed on the eve of World War I was the gold parity of the country's
monetary unit, precisely determined by a duly promulgated law. It was understood
that this parity would never be changed. In virtue of the parity law the unit of the
national currency system was practically a definite quantity of the metal gold. It
was of no consequence whether or not banknotes had been endowed with legaltender power. They were redeemable in gold, and the central banks really did
redeem them fully on demand.

IV.22.1

The difference between the standard that was later called the orthodox or the
classical gold standard and the gold-exchange standard was a difference of degree.
Under the former there were gold coins in the cash holdings of the individual
citizens and firms and they were—together with banknotes, checks, and fractional
coins—employed in business transactions. Under the gold-exchange standard no
gold was used in transacting domestic business. But the central bank sold gold
bullion and foreign exchange against domestic currency at rates that did not exceed
the legal parity by more than the gold margin would be under the classical gold
standard. Thus the countries under the gold-exchange standard were no less
integrated into the system of the international gold standard than those under the
classical gold standard.

IV.22.2

2 The Flexible Standard
The flexible standard, a development of the period between World War I and
World War II, originated from the gold-exchange standard. Its characteristic
features are:
1. The domestic standard's parity as against gold and foreign exchange is
not fixed by a law but simply by the government agency entrusted with the
conduct of monetary affairs.
2. This parity is subject to sudden changes without previous notice to the
public. It is flexible. But this flexibility is practically always employed for
lowering the domestic currency's exchange value as against gold and
those foreign currencies which did not drop against gold. If the downward
jump of parity was rather conspicuous, it was called a devaluation. If it was
slight only, it was usual to speak of a newly manifested weakness of the
currency concerned.
3. The only method available for preventing a currency's exchange value
from dropping below the parity chosen is unconditional redemption of any
amount offered. But the term redemption has in the ears of the self-styled
unorthodox statesman an unpleasant connotation. It reminds him of the
past when the holder of a banknote had a legally warranted right to

IV.22.3

redemption at par. The modern bureaucrat prefers the term pegging. In
fact, in this connection pegging and redeeming mean exactly the same
thing. They mean that the currency concerned is prevented from dropping
below a certain point by the fact that any amount offered for sale is bought
at this price by the redeeming or pegging agency.

Of course, this point—the parity—is not fixed by a law under the flexible standard,
and the agency is free to decline to buy an amount offered at this rate. Then the
price of foreign exchange begins to rise as against this parity. If the government
does not intend to adopt the freely vacillating standard, the pegging is soon
resumed at a lower level, that is, the price of foreign exchange is now higher in
terms of the domestic currency. Such an event is sometimes referred to as raising
the price of gold.

IV.22.4

4. In some countries the conduct of pegging operations is entrusted to the
central bank, in others to a special agency called foreign-exchange
equalization account or a similar name. *9

3 The Freely Vacillating Currency
If the government practices restraint in the issuance of additional amounts of its
credit or fiat money and if public opinion assumes that the inflationary policy will
be stopped altogether in a not too distant future, an inflationary currency system
can prevail for a series of years. The country experiences all the effects resulting
from a currency the unit of which vacillates in exchange value as against the
international gold standard. With regard to these effects the freely vacillating
currency may be called a bad currency. But it can last and is not inevitably headed
for a breakdown.

IV.22.5

The characteristic mark of this freely vacillating currency is that the owner of any
amount of it has no claim whatever against the Treasury, a bank, or any other
agency. There is no redemption either de jure or de facto. The pieces are not money
substitutes but money proper in themselves.

IV.22.6

It sometimes happened, especially in the European inflations of the 1920s, that the
government, frightened by a speedy decline in its currency's price in terms of gold
or foreign exchange, tried to counteract the decline by selling on the market a
certain amount of gold and foreign exchange against domestic currency. It was a
rather nonsensical operation. It would have been much simpler and much more
effective if the government had never issued those amounts which it later bought
back on the market. Such ventures did not affect the course of events. The only
reason they must be mentioned is that governments and their agents sometimes
falsely referred to them as pegging.

IV.22.7

The outstanding instance of a freely vacillating currency today is the United States
dollar, the New Deal dollar. It is not redeemable in gold or any foreign exchange.
The administration is committed to an inflationary policy, increasing more and

IV.22.8

dollar is precarious, dependent on the vicissitudes of the continuing struggle
between a small minority of economists on the one hand and hosts of ignorant
demagogues and their "unorthodox" allies on the other hand.
4 The Illusive Standard
The illusive standard is based on a falsehood. The government decrees that there
exists a parity between the domestic currency and gold or foreign exchange. It is
fully aware of the fact that on the market there prevail exchange ratios lower than
the illusory parity it is pleased to ordain. It knows that nothing is done to make the
illusory parity an effective parity. It knows that there is no convertibility. But it
clings to its pretense and forbids transactions at a ratio deviating from its fictitious
exchange rate. He who sells or buys at any other ratio is guilty of a crime and
severely punished.

IV.22.9

Strict enforcement of such a decree would make all monetary transactions with
foreign countries cease. Therefore the government goes a step further. It
expropriates all foreign exchange owned by its subjects and indemnifies the
expropriated by paying them the amount of domestic currency which according to
the official decree is the equivalent of the confiscated foreign-exchange holdings.
These confiscations convey to the government the national monopoly of dealing
with foreign exchange. It is now the only seller of foreign exchange in the country.
In compliance with its own decree it should sell foreign exchange at the official
rate.

IV.22.10

On the market not hampered by government interference there prevails a tendency
to establish and to maintain such an exchange ratio between the domestic currency
(A) and foreign exchange (B) that it does not make any difference whether one
buys or sells merchandise against A or against B. As long as it is possible to make
a profit buying a definite commodity against B and selling it against A, there will
be a specific demand for amounts of B originating from merchants selling amounts
of A. This specific demand will cease only when no further profits can be reaped
on account of price discrepancies between prices expressed in terms of each of
these two currencies. The market rate is maintained by the fact that there is no
longer an advantage for anybody in paying a higher price for foreign exchange.
Buying either of A against B or of B against A at a higher price (expressed in the
first case in terms of B and in the second in terms of A) than the market price
would not bring specific profits. Arbitrage operations tend to cease at this price.
This is the process that the purchasing-power-parity theory of foreign exchange
describes.

IV.22.11

The policy pretentiously called foreign-exchange control tries to counteract the
operation of the purchasing-power-parity principle and fails lamentably.
Confiscating foreign exchange against an indemnity below its market price is
tantamount to an export duty. It tends to lower exports and thus the amount of
foreign exchange that the government can seize. On the other hand, selling foreign
exchange below its market price is tantamount to subsidizing imports and thereby
to increasing the demand for foreign exchange. The illusive standard and its main
tool, foreign-exchange control, result in a state of affairs which is—rather
inappropriately—called shortage of foreign exchange.

IV.22.12

Scarcity is the essential feature of an economic good. Goods which are not scarce
in relation to the demand for them are not economic goods but free goods. Human

IV.22.13

them. To establish the fact that gold or dollars are in short supply is to pronounce a
truism.
The state of affairs which those talking of a scarcity of dollars want to describe is
this: At the fictitious parity, arbitrarily fixed by the government and enforced by
the whole governmental apparatus of oppression and compulsion, demand for
dollars exceeds the supply of dollars offered for sale. This is the inescapable
consequence of every attempt on the part of a government or other agency to
enforce a maximum price below the height at which the unhampered market would
have determined the market price.

IV.22.14

The Ruritanians would like to consume more foreign goods than they can buy by
exporting Ruritanian products. It is a rather clumsy way of describing this situation
to declare that the Ruritanians suffer from a shortage of foreign exchange. Their
plight is brought about by the fact that they are not producing more and better
things either for domestic or for foreign consumption. If the dollar buys at the free
market 100 Ruritanian rurs and the government fixes a fictitious parity of 50 rurs
and tries to enforce it by foreign-exchange control, things become worse.
Ruritanian exports drop and the demand for foreign goods increases.

IV.22.15

Of course, the Ruritanian government will then resort to various measures
allegedly devised to "improve" the balance of payments. But no matter what is
tried, the "scarcity" of dollars does not disappear.

IV.22.16

Foreign-exchange control is today primarily a device for the virtual expropriation
of foreign investments. It has destroyed the international capital and money market.
It is the main instrument of policies aiming at the elimination of imports and
thereby at the economic isolation of the various countries. It is thus one of the most
important factors in the decline of Western civilization. Future historians will have
to deal with it circumstantially. In referring to the actual monetary problems of our
day it is enough to stress the point that it is an abortive policy.

IV.22.17

CHAPTER 23
The Return to Sound Money
1 Monetary Policy and the Present Trend Toward All-round Planning
The people of all countries agree that the present state of monetary affairs is
unsatisfactory and that a change is highly desirable. However, ideas about the kind
of reform needed and about the goal to be aimed at differ widely. There is some
confused talk about stability and about a standard which is neither inflationary nor
deflationary. The vagueness of the terms employed obscures the fact that people
are still committed to the spurious and self-contradictory doctrines whose very
application has created the present monetary chaos.

IV.23.1

The destruction of the monetary order was the result of deliberate actions on the
part of various governments. The government-controlled central banks and, in the
United States, the government-controlled Federal Reserve System were the
instruments applied in this process of disorganization and demolition. Yet without
exception all drafts for an improvement of currency systems assign to the
governments unrestricted supremacy in matters of currency and design fantastic
images of superprivileged superbanks. Even the manifest futility of the
International Monetary Fund does not deter authors from indulging in dreams about
a world bank fertilizing mankind with floods of cheap credit.

IV.23.2

The inanity of all these plans is not accidental. It is the logical outcome of the
social philosophy of their authors.

IV.23.3

Money is the commonly used medium of exchange. It is a market phenomenon. Its
sphere is that of business transacted by individuals or groups of individuals within
a society based on private ownership of the means of production and the division of
labor. This mode of economic organization—the market economy or capitalism—
is at present unanimously condemned by governments and political parties.
Educational institutions, from universities down to kindergartens, the press, the
radio, the legitimate theater as well as the screen, and publishing firms are almost
completely dominated by people in whose opinion capitalism appears as the most
ghastly of all evils. The goal of their policies is to substitute "planning" for the
alleged planlessness of the market economy. The term planning as they use it
means, of course, central planning by the authorities, enforced by the police power.
It implies the nullification of each citizen's right to plan his own life. It converts the
individual citizens into mere pawns in the schemes of the planning board, whether
it is called Politburo, Reichswirtschaftsministerium, or some other name. Planning
does not differ from the social system that Marx advocated under the names of
socialism and communism. It transfers control of all production activities to the
government and thus eliminates the market altogether. Where there is no market,
there is no money either.

IV.23.4

Although the present trend of economic policies leads toward socialism, the United
States and some other countries have still preserved the characteristic features of
the market economy. Up to now the champions of government control of business
have not yet succeeded in attaining their ultimate goal.

IV.23.5

The Fair Deal party has maintained that it is the duty of the government to
determine what prices, wage rates, and profits are fair and what not, and then to
enforce its rulings by the police power and the courts. It further maintains that it is
a function of the government to keep the rate of interest at a fair level by means of
credit expansion. Finally, it urges a system of taxation that aims at the equalization

IV.23.6

credit expansion. Finally, it urges a system of taxation that aims at the equalization
of incomes and wealth. Full application of either the first or the last of these
principles would by itself consummate the establishment of socialism. But things
have not yet moved so far in this country. The resistance of the advocates of
economic freedom has not yet been broken entirely. There is still an opposition that
has prevented the permanent establishment of direct control of all pric es and wages
and the total confiscation of all incomes above a height deemed fair by those whose
income is lower. In the countries on this side of the Iron Curtain the battle between
the friends and the foes of totalitarian all-round planning is still undecided.
In this great conflict the advocates of public control cannot do without inflation.
They need it in order to finance their policy of reckless spending and of lavishly
subsidizing and bribing the voters. The undesirable but inevitable consequence of
inflation, the rise in prices, provides them with a welcome pretext to establish price
control and thus step by step to realize their scheme of all-round planning. The
illusory profits which the inflationary falsification of economic calculatio n makes
appear are dealt with as if they were real profits; in taxing them away under the
misleading label of excess profits, parts of the capital invested are confiscated. In
spreading discontent and social unrest, inflation generates favorable conditions for
the subversive propaganda of the self-styled champions of welfare and progress.
The spectacle that the political scene of the last two decades has offered has been
really amazing. Governments without any hesitation have embarked upon vast
inflation and government economists have proclaimed deficit spending and
"expansionist" monetary and credit management as the surest way toward
prosperity, steady progress, and economic improvement. But the same
governments and their henchmen have indicted business for the inevitable
consequences of inflation. While advocating high prices and wage rates as a
panacea and praising the administration for having raised the "national income" (of
course, expressed in terms of a depreciating currency) to an unprecedented height,
they blamed private enterprise for charging outrageous prices and profiteering.
While deliberately restricting the output of agricultural products in order to raise
prices, statesmen have had the audacity to contend that capitalism creates scarcity
and that but for the sinister machinations of big business there would be plenty of
everything. And millions of voters have swallowed all this.

IV.23.7

There is need to realize that the economic policies of self-styled progressives
cannot do without infla tion. They cannot and never will accept a policy of sound
money. They can abandon neither their policies of deficit spending nor the help
their anticapitalist propaganda receives from the inevitable consequences of
inflation. It is true they talk about the necessity of doing away with inflation. But
what they mean is not to end the policy of increasing the quantity of money in
circulation but to establish price control, that is, futile schemes to escape the
emergency arising inevitably from their policies.

IV.23.8

Monetary reconstruction, including the abandonment of inflation and the return to
sound money, is not merely a problem of financial technique that can be solved
without change in the structure of general economic policies. There cannot be
stable money within an environment dominated by ideologies hostile to the
preservation of economic freedom. Bent on disintegrating the market economy, the
ruling parties will certainly not consent to reforms that would deprive them of their
most formidable weapon, inflation. Monetary reconstruction presupposes first of all
total and unconditional rejection of those allegedly progressive policies which in
the United States are designated by the slogans New Deal and Fair Deal.

IV.23.9

2 The Integral Gold Standard

Sound money still means today what it meant in the nineteenth century: the gold
standard.

IV.23.10

The eminence of the gold standard consists in the fact that it makes the
determination of the monetary unit's purchasing power independent of the
measures of governments. It wrests from the hands of the "economic tsars" their
most redoubtable instrument. It makes it impossible for them to inflate. This is why
the gold standard is furiously attacked by all those who expect that they will be
benefited by bounties from the seemingly inexhaustible government purse.

IV.23.11

What is needed first of all is to force the rulers to spend only what, by virtue of
duly promulgated laws, they have collected as taxes. Whether governments should
borrow from the public at all and, if so, to what extent are questions that are
irrelevant to the treatment of monetary problems. The main thing is that the
government should no longer be in a position to increase the quantity of money in
circulation and the amount of checkbook money not fully—that is, 100 percent—
covered by deposits paid in by the public. No backdoor must be left open where
inflation can slip in. No emergency can justify a return to inflation. Inflation can
provide neither the weapons a nation needs to defend its independence nor the
capital goods required for any project. It does not cure unsatisfactory conditions. It
merely helps the rulers whose policies brought about the catastrophe to exculpate
themselves.

IV.23.12

One of the goals of the reform suggested is to explode and to kill forever the
superstitious belief that governments and banks have the power to make the nation
or individual citizens richer, out of nothing and without making anybody poorer.
The shortsighted observer sees only the things the government has accomplished
by spending the newly created money. He does not see the things the
nonperformance of which provided the means for the government's success. He
fails to realize that inflation does not create additional goods but merely shifts
wealth and income from some groups of people to others. He neglects, moreover,
to take notice of the secondary effects of inflation: malinvestment and
decumulation of capital.

IV.23.13

Notwithstanding the passionate propaganda of the inflationists of all shades, the
number of people who comprehend the necessity of entirely stopping inflation for
the benefit of the public treasury is increasing. Keynesianism is losing face even at
the universities. A few years ago governments proudly boasted of the "unorthodox"
methods of deficit spending, pump-priming, and raising the "national income."
They have not discarded these methods but they no longer brag about them. They
even occasionally admit that it would not be such a bad thing to have balanced
budgets and mon etary stability. The political chances for a return to sound money
are still slim, but they are certainly better than they have been in any other period
since 1914.

IV.23.14

Yet most of the supporters of sound money do not want to go beyond the
elimination of inflation for fiscal purposes. They want to prevent any kind of
government borrowing from banks issuing banknotes or crediting the borrower on
an account subject to check. But they do not want to prevent in the same way credit
expansion for the sake of lending to business. The reform they have in mind is by
and large bringing back the state of affairs prevailing before the inflations of World
War I. Their idea of sound money is that of the nineteenth-century economists with
all the errors of the British Banking School that disfigured it. They still cling to the
schemes whose application brought about the collapse of the European banking
systems and currencies and discredited the market economy by generating the
almost regular recurrence of periods of economic depression.

IV.23.15

almost regular recurrence of periods of economic depression.
There is no need to add anything to the treatment of these problems as provided in
part three of this volume and also in my book Human Action. If one wants to avoid
the recurrence of economic crises, one must avoid the expansion of credit that
creates the boom and inevitably leads into the slump.

IV.23.16

Even if for the sake of argument we neglect to refer to these issues, one must
realize that conditions are no longer such as the nineteenth-century champions of
bank-credit expansion had in mind.

IV.23.17

These statesmen and authors regarded the government's financial needs as the main
and practically the only threat to the privileged bank's or banks' solvency. Ample
historical experience had proved that the government could and did force the banks
to lend to them. Suspension of the banknotes' convertibility and legal-tender
provisions had transformed the "hard" currencies of many countries into
questionable paper money. The logical conclusion to be drawn from these facts
would have been to do away with privileged banks altogether and to subject all
banks to the rule of common law and the commercial codes that oblige everybody
to perform contracts in full faithfulness to the pledged word. Free banking would
have spared the world many crises and catastrophes. But the tragic error of
nineteenth-century bank doctrine was the belief that lowering the rate of interest
below the height it would have on an unhampered market is a blessing for a nation
and that credit expansion is the right means for the attainment of this end. Thus
arose the characteristic duplicity of the bank policy. The central bank or banks must
not lend to the government but should be free, within certain limits, to expand
credit to business. The idea was that in this way one could make the central
banking function independent of the government.

IV.23.18

Such an arrangement presupposes that government and business are two distinct
realms of the conduct of affairs. The government levies taxes but it does not
interfere with the way the various enterprises operate. If the government meddles
with central-bank affairs, its objective is to borrow for the treasury and not to
induce the banks to lend more to business. In making bank loans to the government
illegal, the bank's management is enabled to gauge its credit transactions in
accordance with the needs of business only.

IV.23.19

Whatever the merits or demerits of this point of view may have been in older
days,*10 it is obvious that it is no longer of any consequence. The main inflationary
motive of our day is the so-called full-employment policy, not the treasury's
incapacity to fill its empty vaults from sources other than bank loans. Monetary
policy is regarded—wrongly, of course—as an instrument for keeping wage rates
above the height they would have reached on an unhampered labor market. Credit
expansion is subservient to the unions. If a hundred or seventy years ago the
government of a Western nation had ventured to extort a loan from the central
bank, the public would unanimously have sided with the bank and thwarted the
plot. But for many years there has been little opposition to credit expansion for the
sake of "creating jobs," that is, for providing business with the money needed for
the payment of the wage rates which the unions, strongly aided by the government,
force business to grant. Nobody took notice of warning voices when England in
1931 and the United States in 1933 entered upon the policy for which Lord Keynes,
a few years later in his General Theory, tried to concoct a justification, and when in
1936 Blum, in imposing upon the French employers the so-called Matignon
agreements, ordered the Bank of France to lend freely the sums business needed for
complying with the dictates of the unions.

IV.23.20

Inflation and credit expansion are the means to obfuscate the fact that there prevails
a nature-given scarcity of the material things on which the satisfaction of human
wants depends. The main concern of capitalist private enterprise is to remove this
scarcity as much as possible and to provide a continuously improving standard of
living for an increasing population. The historian cannot help noting that laissezfaire and rugged individualism have to an unprecedented extent succeeded in their
endeavors to supply the common man more and more amply with food, shelter, and
many other amenities. But however remarkable these improvements may be, there
will always be a strict limit to the amount that can be consumed without reducing
the capital available for the continuation and, even more, the expansion of
production.

IV.23.21

In older ages social reformers believed that all that was needed to improve the
materia l conditions of the poorer strata of society was to confiscate the surplus of
the rich and to distribute it among those having less. The falsehood of this formula,
despite the fact that it is still the ideological principle guiding present-day taxation,
is no longer contested by any reasonable man. One may neglect stressing the point
that such a distribution can add only a negligible amount to the income of the
immense majority. The main thing is that the total amount produced in a nation or
in the whole world over a definite period of time is not a magnitude independent of
the mode of society's economic organization. The threat of being deprived by
confiscation of a considerable or even the greater part of the yield of one's own
activities slackens the individual's pursuit of wealth and thus results in a diminution
of the national product. The Marxian socialists once indulged in reveries
concerning a fabulous increase in riches to be expected from the socialist mode of
production. The truth is that every infringement of property rights and every
restriction of free enterprise impairs the productivity of labor. One of the foremost
concerns of all parties hostile to economic freedom is to withhold this knowledge
from the voters. The various brands of socialism and interventionism could not
retain their popularity if people were to discover that the measures whose adoption
is hailed as social progress curtail production and tend to bring about capital
decumulation. To conceal these facts from the public is one of the services inflation
renders to the so-called progressive policies. Inflation is the true opium of the
people and it is administered to them by anticapitalist governments and parties.

IV.23.22

3 Currency Reform in Ruritania
When compared with conditions in the United States or in Switzerland, Ruritania
appears a poor country. The average income of a Ruritanian is below the average
income of an American or a Swiss.

IV.23.23

Once, in the past, Ruritania was on the gold standard. But the government issued
little sheets of printed paper to which it assigned legal-tender power in the ratio of
one paper rur to one gold rur. All residents of Ruritania were made to accept any
amount of paper rurs as the equivalent of the same nominal amount of gold rurs.
The government alone did not comply with the rule it had decreed. It did not
convert paper rurs into gold rurs in accordance with the ratio 1 : 1. As it went on
increasing the quantity of paper rurs, the effects resulted which Gresham's law
describes. The gold rurs disappeared from the market. They were either hoarded by
Ruritanians or sold abroad.

IV.23.24

Almost all the nations of the earth have behaved in the way the Ruritanian
government did. But the rates of the inflationary increase of the quantities of their
national fiat money have been different. Some nations were more moderate in
issuing additional quantities, some less. The result is that the exchange ratios
between the various nations' local fiat-money currencies are no longer the same

IV.23.25

between the various nations' local fiat-money currencies are no longer the same
ratios that prevailed between their currencies in the period before they went off the
gold standard. In those old days five gold rurs were equal to one gold dollar.
Although today's dollar is no longer the equivalent of the weight of gold it
represented under the gold standard, that is, before 1933, 100 paper rurs are needed
to buy one of these depreciated dollars. A short time ago eighty paper rurs could
buy one dollar. If the present rates of inflation both in the United States and in
Ruritania do not change, the paper rur will drop more and more in terms of dollars.
The Ruritanian government knows very well that all it has to do in order to prevent
a further depreciation of the paper rur as against the dollar is to slow down the
deficit spending it finances by continued inflation. In fact, in order to maintain a
stable exchange rate against the dollar, it would not be forced to abandon inflation
altogether. It would only have to reduce it to a rate in due proportion to the extent
of American inflation. But, government officials say, it is impossible for Ruritania,
being a poor country, to balance its budget with a smaller amount of inflation than
the present one. For such a reduction would enjoin upon it the necessity of undoing
some of the results of social progress and of relapsing into the conditions of "social
backwardness" of the United States. The government has nationalized railroads,
telegraphs, and telephones and operates various plants, mines, and branches of
industry as national enterprises. Every year the conduct of affairs of almost all the
public undertakings produces a deficit that must be covered by taxes collected from
the shrinking group of nonnationalized and nonmunicipalized businesses. Private
business is a source of the treasury's revenue. Nationalized industry is a drain upon
the government's funds. But these funds would be insufficient in Ruritania if not
swelled by more and more inflation.

IV.23.26

From the point of view of monetary technique the stabilization of a national
currency's exchange ratio as against foreign, less-inflated currencies or against gold
is a simple matter. The preliminary step is to abstain from any further increase in
the quantity of domestic currency. This will at the outset stop the further rise in
foreign-exchange rates and the price of gold. After some oscillations a somewhat
stable exchange rate will appear, the height of which depends on the purchasingpower parity. At this rate it no longer makes any difference whether one buys or
sells against currency A or currency B.

IV.23.27

But this stability cannot last indefinitely. While an increase in the production of
gold or an increase in the issuance of dollars continues abroad, Ruritania now has a
currency the quantity of which is rigidly limited. Under these conditions there can
no longer prevail full correspondence between the movements of commodity prices
on the Ruritanian markets and those on foreign markets. If prices in terms of gold
or dollars are rising, those in terms of rurs will la g behind them or even drop. This
means that the purchasing-power parity is changing. A tendency will emerge
toward an enhancement of the price of the rur as expressed in gold or dollars. When
this trend becomes manifest, the propitious moment for the completion of the
monetary reform has arrived. The exchange rate that prevails on the market at this
juncture is to be promulgated as the new legal parity between the rur and either
gold or the dollar. Unconditional convertibility at this legal rate of every paper rur
against gold or dollars and vice versa is henceforward to be the fundamental
principle.

IV.23.28

The reform thus consists of two measures. The first is to end inflation by setting an
insurmountable barrier to any further increase in the supply of domestic money.
The second is to prevent the relative deflation that the first measure will, after a
certain time, bring about in terms of other currencies the supply of which is not
rigidly limited in the same way. As soon as the second step has been taken, any

IV.23.29

rigidly limited in the same way. As soon as the second step has been taken, any
amount of rurs can be converted into gold or dollars without any delay and any
amount of gold or dollars into rurs. The agency, whatever its appellation may be,
that the reform law entrusts with the performance of these exchange operations
needs for technical reasons a certain small reserve of gold or dollars. But its main
concern is, at least in the initial stage of its functioning, how to provide the rurs
necessary for the exchange of gold or foreign currency against rurs. To enable the
agency to perform this task, it has to be entitled to issue additional rurs against a
full—100 percent—coverage by gold or foreign exchange bought from the public.
It is politically expedient not to charge this agency with any responsibilities and
duties other than those of buying and selling gold or foreign exchange according to
the legal parity. Its task is to make this legal parity an effective real market rate,
preventing, by unconditional redemption of rurs, a drop of their market price
against le gal parity, and, by unconditional buying of gold or foreign exchange, an
enhancement of the price of rurs as against legal parity.

IV.23.30

At the very start of its operations the agency needs, as has been mentioned, a
certain reserve of gold or foreign exchange. This reserve has to be lent to it either
by the government or by the central bank, free of interest and never to be recalled.
No business other than this preliminary loan must be negotiated between the
govern ment and any bank or institution dependent on the government on the one
hand and the agency on the other hand. *11 The total amount of rurs issued before the
start of the new monetary regime must not be increased by any operations on the
part of the government; only the agency is free to issue additional new rurs, rigidly
complying in such issuance with the rule that each of these new rurs must be fully
covered by gold or foreign exchange paid in by the public in exchange for them.

IV.23.31

The government's mint may go on to coin and to issue as many fractional or
subsidiary coins as seem to be needed by the public. In order to prevent the
government from misusing its monopoly of mintage for inflationary ventures and
flooding the market, under the pretext of catering to peoples' demand for "change,"
with huge quantities of such tokens, two provisions are imperative. To these
fractional coins only a strictly limited legal-tender power should be given for
payments to any payee but the government. Against the government alone they
should have unlimited legal-tender power, and the government, moreover, must be
obliged to redeem in rurs, without any delay and without any cost to the bearer, any
amount presented, either by any private individual, firm, or corporation or by the
agency. Unlimited legal-tender power must be reserved to the various
denominations of banknotes of one rur and upward, issued either before the reform
or, if after the reform, against full coverage in gold or foreign exchange.

IV.23.32

Apart from this exchange of fractional coins against legal-tender rurs the agency
deals exclusively with the public and not with the government or any of the
institutions dependent on it, especially not with the central bank. The agency serves
the public and deals exclusively with that part of the public that wants to avail
itself, of its own free accord, of the agency's services. But no privileges are
accorded to the agency. It does not get a monopoly for dealing in gold or foreign
exchange. The market is perfectly free from any restriction. Everybody is free to
buy or sell gold or foreign exchange. There is no centralization of such
transactions. Nobody is forced to sell gold or foreign exchange to the agency or to
buy gold or foreign exchange from it.

IV.23.33

When these measures are once achieved, Ruritania is either on the gold-exchange
standard or on the dollar-exchange standard. It has stabilized its currency as against
gold or the dollar. This is enough for the beginning. There is no need for the

IV.23.34

gold or the dollar. This is enough for the beginning. There is no need for the
moment to go further. No longer threatened by a breakdown of its currency, the
nation can calmly wait to see how monetary affairs in other countries will develop.
The reform suggested would deprive the government of Ruritania of the power to
spend any rur above the sums collected by taxing the citizens or by borrowing from
the public, whether domestic or foreign. Once this is achieved, the specter of an
unfavorable balance of payment fades away. If Ruritanians want to buy foreign
products, they must export domestic products. If they do not export, they cannot
import.

IV.23.35

But, says the inflationist, what about the flight of capital? Will not unpatriotic
citizens of Ruritania and foreigners who have invested capital within the country
try to transfer their capital to other countries offering better prospects for business?

IV.23.36

John Badman, a Ruritanian, and Paul Yank, an American, have invested in
Ruritania in the past. Badman owns a mine, Yank a factory. Now they realize that
their investments are unsafe. The Ruritanian government is committed to a policy
that confiscates not only all the yields of their investments but step by step the
substance too. Badman and Yank want to salvage what still can be salvaged; they
want to sell against rurs and to transfer the proceeds by buying dollars and
exporting them. But their problem is to find a buyer. If all those who have the
funds needed for such a purchase think like them, it will be absolutely impossible
to sell even at the lowest price. Badman and Yank have missed the right moment.
Now it is too late.

IV.23.37

But perhaps there are buyers. Bill Sucker, an American, and Peter Simple, a
Ruritanian, believe that the prospects of the investments concerned are more
propitious than Badman and Yank assume. Sucker has dollars ready; he buys rurs
and against these rurs Yank's factory. Yank buys the dollars Sucker has sold to the
agency. Simple has saved rurs and invests his savings in purchasing Badman's
mine. It would have been possible for him to employ his savings in a different way,
to buy producers' or consumers' goods in Ruritania. The fact that he does not buy
these goods brings about a drop in their prices or prevents a rise which would have
occurred if he had bought them. It disarranges the price structure on the domestic
market in such a way as to make exports possible that could not be effected before
or to prevent imports which were effected before. Thus it produces the amount of
dollars which Badman buys and sends abroad.

IV.23.38

A specter that worries many advocates of foreign-exchange control is the
assumption that the Ruritanians engaged in export trade could leave the foreignexchange proceeds of their business abroad and thus deprive the ir country of a part
of its foreign exchange.

IV.23.39

Miller is such an exporter He buys commodity A in Ruritania and sells it abroad.
Now he chooses to go out of business and to transfer all his assets to a foreign
country. But this does not stop Ruritania's exporting A. As according to our
assumption there can be profits earned by buying A in Ruritania and selling it
abroad, the trade will go on. If no Ruritanian has the funds needed for engaging in
it, foreigners will fill the gap. For there are always people in markets not entirely
destroyed by government sabotage who are eager to take advantage of any
opportunity to earn profits.

IV.23.40

Let us emphasize this point again: If people want to consume what other people
have produced, they must pay for it by giving the sellers something they
themselves have produced or by rendering them some services. This is true in the

IV.23.41

themselves have produced or by rendering them some services. This is true in the
relation between the people of the state of New York and those of Iowa no less than
in the relation between the people of Ruritania and those of Laputania. The balance
of payments always balances. For if the Ruritanians (or New Yorkers) do not pay,
the Laputanians (or Iowans) will not sell.
4 The United States' Return to a Sound Currency
With Washington politicians and Wall Street pundits the problem of a return to the
gold standard is taboo. Only imbecile or ignorant people, say the professorial and
journalistic apologists of inflation, can nurture such an absurd idea.

IV.23.42

These gentlemen would be perfectly right if they were merely to assert that the gold
standard is incompatible with the methods of deficit spending. One of the main
aims of a return to gold is precisely to do away with this system of waste,
corruption, and arbitrary government. But they are mistaken if they would have us
believe that the reestablishment and preservation of the gold standard is
Economically and technically impossible.

IV.23.43

The first step must be a radical and unconditional abandonment of any further
inflation. The total amount of dollar bills, whatever their name or legal
characteristic may be, must not be increased by further issuance. No bank must be
permitted to expand the total amount of its deposits subject to check or the balance
of such deposits of any individual customer, be he a private citizen or the U.S.
Treasury, otherwise than by receiving cash deposits in legal-tender banknotes from
the public or by receiving a check payable by another domestic bank subject to the
same limitations. This means a rigid 100 percent reserve for all future deposits; that
is, all deposits not already in existence on the first day of the reform.

IV.23.44

At the same time all restrictions on trading and holding gold must be repealed. The
free market for gold is to be reestablished. Everybody, whether a resident of the
United States or of any foreign country, will be free to buy and to sell, to lend and
to borrow, to import and to export, and, of course, to hold any amount of gold,
whether minted or not minted, in any part of the nation's territory as well as in
foreign countries.

IV.23.45

It is to be expected that this freedom of the gold market will result in the inflow of
a considerable quantity of gold from abroad. Private citizens will probably invest a
part of their cash holdings in gold. In some foreign countries the sellers of this gold
exported to the United States may hoard the dollar bills received and leave the
balances with American banks untouched. But many or most of these sellers of
gold will probably buy Americ an products.

IV.23.46

In this first period of the reform it is imperative that the American government and
all institutions dependent upon it, including the Federal Reserve System, keep
entirely out of the gold market. A free gold market could not come into existence if
the administration were to try to manipulate the price by underselling. The new
monetary regime must be protected against malicious acts by officials of the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve System. There cannot be any doubt that
officialdom will be eager to sabotage a reform whose main purpose is to curb the
power of the bureaucracy in monetary matters.

IV.23.47

The unconditional prohibition of the further issuance of any piece of paper to
which legal-tender power is granted refers also to the issuance of the type of bills
called silver certificates. The constitutional prerogative of Congress to decree that
the United States is bound to buy definite quantities of a definite commodity,

IV.23.48

the United States is bound to buy definite quantities of a definite commodity,
whether silver or potatoes or something else, at a definite price exceeding the
market price and to store or to dump the quantities purchased must not be
infringed. But such purchases are henceforth to be paid out of funds collected by
taxing the people or by borrowing from the public.
It is probable that the price of gold established after some oscillations on the
American market will be higher than $35 per ounce, the rate of the Gold Reserve
Act of 1934. It may be somewhere between $36 and $38, perhaps even somewhat
higher. Once the market pr ice has attained some stability, the time will have come
to decree this market rate as the new legal parity of the dollar and to secure its
unconditional convertibility at this parity.

IV.23.49

A new agency is to be established, the Conversion Agency. The United States
government lends to it a certain amount, let us say one billion dollars, in gold
bullion (computed at the new parity), free of interest and never to be recalled. The
Conversion Agency has two functions only: First, to sell gold bullion at the parity
price to the public against dollars without any restriction. After a short time, when
the mint will have coined a sufficient quantity of new American gold coins, the
Conversion Agency will be obliged to hand out such gold pieces against paper
dollars and checks drawn upon a solvent American bank. Second, to buy, against
dollar bills at the legal parity, any amount of gold offered to it. To enable the
Conversion Agency to execute this second task it is to be entitled to issue dollar
bills against a 100 percent reserve in gold.

IV.23.50

The Treasury is bound to sell gold—bullion or new American coins—to the
Conversion Agency at legal parity against any kind of American legal-tender bills
issued before the start of the reform, against American token coins, or against
checks drawn upon a member bank. To the extent that such sales reduce the
government's gold holdings, the total amount of all varieties of legal-tender paper
sheets, issued before the start of the reform, and of member-bank deposits subject
to check is to be reduced. How this reduction is to be distributed among the various
classes of these types of currency can be left, apart from the problem of the
banknotes of small denominations, to be dealt with later,*12 to the discretion of the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board.

IV.23.51

It is essential for the reform suggested that the Federal Reserve System should be
kept out of its way. Whatever one may think about the merits or demerits of the
Federal Reserve legislation of 1913, the fact remains that the system has been
abused by the most reckless inflationary policy. No institution and no man
connected in any way with the blunders and sins of the past decades must be
permitted to influence future monetary conditions.

IV.23.52

The Federal Reserve System is saddled with an awkward problem, namely, the
huge amount of government bonds held by the member banks. Whatever solution
may be adopted for this question, it must not affect the purchasing power of the
dollar Government finance and the nation's medium of exchange have in the future
to be two entirely separate things.

IV.23.53

The banknotes issued by the Federal Reserve System as well as the silver
certificates may remain in circulation. Unconditional convertibility and the strict
prohibition of any further increase of their amount will have radically changed their
catallactic character It is this alone that counts.

IV.23.54

However, a very important change concerning the denomination of these notes is
indispensable. What the United States needs is not the gold-exchange standard but

IV.23.55

indispensable. What the United States needs is not the gold-exchange standard but
the classical old gold standard, decried by the inflationists as orthodox. Gold must
be in the cash holdings of everybody. Everybody must see gold coins changing
hands, must be used to having gold coins in his pockets, to receiving gold coins
when he cashes his paycheck, and to spending gold coins when he buys in a store.
This state of affairs can be easily achie ved by withdrawing all bills of the
denominations of five, ten, and perhaps also twenty dollars from circulation. There
will be under the suggested new monetary regime two classes of legal-tender paper
bills: the old stock and the new stock. The old stock consists of all those paper
sheets that at the start of the reform were in circulation as legal-tender paper,
without regard to their appellation and legal quality other than legal-tender power.
It is strictly forbidden to increase this stock by the further issuance of any
additional notes of this class. On the other hand, it will decrease to the extent that
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board decree that the reduction in the total
amount of legal-tender notes of this old stock plus bank deposits subject to check,
existing at the start of the reform, has to be effected by the final withdrawal and
destruction of definite quantities of such old-stock legal-tender notes. Moreover,
the Treasury is bound to withdraw from circulation, against the new gold coins, and
to destroy, within a period of one year after the promulgation of the new legal gold
parity of the dollar, all notes of five, ten, and perhaps also twenty dollars.

IV.23.56

It does not require any special mention that the new-stock legal-tender notes to be
issued by the Conversion Agency must be issued only in denominations of one
dollar or fifty dollars and upward.

IV.23.57

Old British banking doctrine banned small banknotes (in their opinion, notes
smaller than £5) because it wanted to protect the poorer strata of the population,
supposed to be less familiar with the conditions of the banking business and
therefore more liable to be cheated by wicked bankers. Today the main concern is
to protect the nation against a repetition of the inflationary practices of
governments. The gold-exchange standard, whatever argument may be advanced in
its favor, is vitiated by an incurable defect. It offers to governments an easy
opportunity to embark upon inflation unbeknown to the nation. With the exception
of a few specialists, nobody becomes aware in time of the fact that a radical change
in monetary matters has occurred. Laymen, that is 9,999 out of 10,000 citizens, do
not realize that it is not commodities that are becoming dearer but their tender that
is becoming cheaper.

IV.23.58

What is needed is to alarm the masses in time. The workingman in cashing his
paycheck should learn that some foul trick has been played upon him. The
President, Congress, and the Supreme Court have clearly proved their inability or
unwillingness to protect the common man, the voter, from being victimized by
inflationary machinations. The function of securing a sound currency must pass
into new hands, into those of the whole nation. As soon as Gres ham's law begins
to come into play and bad paper drives good gold out of the pockets of the common
man, there should be a stir. Perpetual vigilance on the part of the citizens can
achieve what a thousand laws and dozens of alphabetical bureaus with hordes of
employees never have and never will achieve: the preservation of a sound currency.

IV.23.59

The classical or orthodox gold standard alone is a truly effective check on the
power of the government to inflate the currency. Without such a check all other
constitutional safeguards can be rendered vain.

IV.23.60

5 The Controversy Concerning the Choice of the New Gold Parity

Some advocates of a return to the gold standard disagree on an important point
with the scheme designed in the preceding section. In the opinion of these
dissenters there is no reason to deviate from the gold price of $35 per ounce as
decreed in 1934. This rate, they assert, is the legal parity, and it would be iniquitous
to devalue the dollar in relation to it.

IV.23.61

The controversy between the two groups, those advocating the return to gold at the
previous parity (whom we may call the restorers) and those recommending the
adoption of a new parity consonant with the present market value of the currency
that is to be put upon a gold basis (we may call them the stabilizers), is not new. It
has flared up whenever a currency depreciated by inflation has had to be returned
to a sound basis.

IV.23.62

The restorers look upon money primarily as the standard of deferred payments. A
consistent restorer would have to argue in this way: People have in the past, that is,
before 1933, made contracts in virtue of which they promised to pay a definite
amount of dollars which at that time meant standard dollars, containing 25.8 grains
of gold, nine-tenths fine. It would be manifestly unfair to the creditors to give the
debtors the right to fulfill such contracts by the payment of the same nominal
number of dollars containing a smaller weight of gold.

IV.23.63

However, the reasoning of such consistent restorers would be correct only if all
existing claims to deferred payments had been contracted before 1933 and if the
present creditors of such contracts were the same people (or their heirs) who had
originally made the contracts. Both these assumptions are contrary to fact. Most of
the pre-1933 contracts have already been settled in the two decades that have
elapsed. There are, of course, also government bonds, corporate bonds, and
mortgages of pre-1933 origin. But in many or even in most cases these claims are
no longer held by the same people who held them before 1933. Why should a man
who in 1951 bought a corporate bond issued in 1928 be indemnified for losses
which not he himself but one of the preceding owners of this bond suffered? And
why should a munic ipality or a corporation that borrowed depreciated dollars in
1945 be liable to pay back dollars of greater gold weight and purchasing power?

IV.23.64

In fact there are in present-day America hardly any consistent restorers who would
recommend a return to the old pre-Roosevelt dollar. There are only inconsistent
restorers who advocate a return to the Roosevelt dollar of 1934, the dollar of 15
5/21 grains of gold, nine-tenths fine. But this gold content of the dollar, fixed by
the President in virtue of the Gold Reserve Act of January 30, 1934, was never a
legal parity. It was, as far as the domestic affairs of the United States are
concerned, merely of academic value. It was without any legal-tender validity.
Legal tender under the Roosevelt legislation was only various sheets of printed
paper. These sheets of paper could not be converted into gold. There was no longer
any gold parity of the dollar. To hold gold was a criminal offense for the residents
of the United States. The Roosevelt gold price of $35 per ounce (instead of the old
price of $20.67 per ounce) had validity only for the government's purchases of gold
and for certain transactions between the American Federal Reserve and foreign
governments and central banks. Those juridical considerations that the consistent
restorers could possibly advance in favor of a return to the pre-Roosevelt dollar
parity are of no avail when advanced in favor of the rate of 1934 that was not a
parity.

IV.23.65

It is paradoxical indeed that the inconsistent restorers try to justify their proposal by
referring to honesty. For the role the gold content of the dollar they want to restore
played in American monetary history was certainly not honest in the sense in which
they employ this term. It was a makeshift in a scheme which these very restorers

IV.23.66

they employ this term. It was a makeshift in a scheme which these very restorers
themselves condemn as dishonest.
However, the main deficiency of any form of the restorers' arguments, whether
they consistently advocate the McKinley dollar or inconsistently the Roosevelt
dollar, is to be seen in the fact that they look upon money exclusively from the
point of view of its function as the standard of deferred payments. As they see it,
the main fault or even the only fault of an inflationary policy is that it favors the
debtors at the expense of the creditors. They neglect the other more general and
more serious effects of inflation.

IV.23.67

Inflation does not affect the prices of the various commodities and services at the
same time and to the same extent. Some prices rise sooner, some lag behind. While
inflation takes its course and has not yet exhausted all its price-affecting
potentialities, there are in the nation winners and losers. Winners—popularly called
profiteers if they are entrepreneurs—are people who are in the fortunate position of
selling commodities and services the prices of which are already adjusted to the
changed relation of the supply of and the demand for money while the prices of
commodities and services they are buying still correspond to a previous state of this
relation. Losers are those who are forced to pay the new higher prices for the things
they buy while the things they are selling have not yet risen at all or not
sufficiently. The serious social conflicts which inflation kindles, all the grievances
of consumers, wage earners, and salaried people it originates, are caused by the fact
that its effects appear neither synchronously nor to the same extent. If an increase
in the quantity of money in circulation were to produce at one blow proportionally
the same rise in the prices of every kind of commodities and services, changes in
the monetary unit's purchasing power would, apart from affecting deferred
payments, be of no social consequence; they would neither benefit nor hurt
anybody and would not arouse political unrest. But such an evenness in the effects
of inflation—or, for that matter, of deflation—can never happen.

IV.23.68

The great Roosevelt-Truman inflation has, apart from depriving all creditors of a
considerable part of principal and interest, gravely hurt the material concerns of a
great number of Americans. But one cannot repair the evil done by bringing about
a deflation. Those favored by the uneven course of the deflation will only in rare
cases be the same people who were hurt by the uneven course of the inflation.
Those losing on account of the uneven course of the deflation will only in rare
cases be the same people whom the inflation has benefited. The effects of a
deflation produced by the choice of the new gold parity at $35 per ounce would not
heal the wounds inflicted by the inflation of the two last decades. They would
merely open new sores.

IV.23.69

Today people complain about inflation. If the schemes of the restorers are
executed, they will complain about deflation. As for psychological reasons, the
effects of deflation are much more unpopular than those of inflation; a powerful
proinflation movement would spring up under the disguise of an antideflation
program and would seriously jeopardize all attempts to reestablish a sound-money
policy.

IV.23.70

Those questioning the conclusiveness of these statements should study the
monetary history of the United States. There they will find ample corroborating
material. Still more instructive is the monetary history of Great Britain.

IV.23.71

When, after the Napoleonic wars, the United Kingdom had to face the problem of
reforming its currency it chose the return to the prewar gold parity of the pound and
gave no thought to the idea of stabilizing the exchange ratio between the paper

IV.23.72

gave no thought to the idea of stabilizing the exchange ratio between the paper
pound and gold as it had developed on the market under the impact of the inflation.
It preferred deflation to stabilization and to the adoption of a new parity consonant
with the state of the market. Calamitous economic hardships resulted from this
deflation; they stirred social unrest and begot the rise of an inflationist movement
as well as the anticapitalistic agitation from which after a while Engels and Marx
drew their inspiration.
After the end of World War I England repeated the error committed after Waterloo.
It did not stabilize the actual gold value of the pound. It returned in 1925 to the old
prewar and preinflation parity of the pound. As the labor unions would not tolerate
an adjustment of wage rates to the increased gold value and purchasing power of
the pound, a crisis of British foreign trade resulted. The government and the
journalists, both terrorized by the union leaders, timidly refrained from making any
allusion to the height of wage rates and the disastrous effects of the union tactics.
They blamed a mysterious overvaluation of the pound for the decline in British
exports and the resulting spread of unemployment. They knew only one remedy,
inflation. In 1931 the British government adopted it.

IV.23.73

There cannot be any doubt that British inflationism got its strength from the
conditions that had developed out of the deflationary currency reform of 1925. It is
true that but for the stubborn policy of the unions the effects of the deflation would
have been absorbed long before 1931. Yet the fact remains that in the opinion of
the masses, conditions gave an apparent justification to the Keynesian fallacies.
There is a close connection between the 1925 reform and the popularity that
inflationism enjoyed in Great Britain in the thirties and forties.

IV.23.74

The inconsistent restorers advance in favor of their plans the fact that the deflation
they would bring about would be small, since the difference between a gold price
of $35 and a gold price of $37 or $38 is rather slight. Now whether this difference
is to be regarded as slight or not is a matter of an arbitrary judgment. Let us for the
sake of argument accept its qualification as slight. It is certainly true that a smaller
deflation has less undesirable effects than a bigger one. But this truism is no valid
argument in favor of a deflationary policy the inexpediency of which is undeniable.

IV.23.75

6 Concluding Remarks
The present unsatisfactory state of monetary affairs is an outcome of the social
ideology to which our contemporaries are committed and of the economic policies
which this ideology begets. People lament over inflation, but they enthusiastically
support policies that could not go on without inflation. While they grumble about
the inevitable consequences of inflation, they stubbornly oppose any attempt to
stop or to restrict deficit spending.

IV.23.76

The suggested reform of the currency system and the return to sound monetary
conditions presuppose a radical change in economic philosophies. There cannot be
any question of the gold standard as long as waste, capital decumulation, and
corruption are the foremost characteristics of the conduct of public affairs.

IV.23.77

Cynics dispose of the advocacy of a restitution of the gold standard by calling it
utopian. Yet we have only the choice between two utopias: the utopia of a market
economy, not paralyzed by government sabotage on the one hand, and the utopia of
totalitarian all-round planning on the other hand. The choice of the first alternative
implies the decision in favor of the gold standard.

APPENDIX A
On the Classification of Monetary Theories
(This Appendix was first published as a journal article in 1917-1918, it was later
used as a chapter in the 2nd German edition of 1924, but was then relegated to the
Appendix in the Batson translation of 1934.)
1 Catallactic and Acatallactic Monetary Doctrine
The phenomenon of money occupies so prominent a position among the other
phenomena of economic life, that it has been speculated upon even by persons who
have devoted no further attention to the problems of economic theory, and even at a
time when thorough investigation into the processes of exchange was still
unknown. The results of such speculations were various. The merchants and,
following them, the jurists who were closely connected with mercantile affairs,
ascribed the use of money to the properties of the precious metals, and said that the
value of money depended on the value of the precious metals. Canonist
jurisprudence, ignorant of the ways of the world, saw the origin of the employment
of money in the command of the state; it taught that the value of money was a valor
impositus. Others, again, sought to explain the problem by means of analogy. From
a biological point of view, they compared money with the blood; as the circulation
of the blood animates the body, so the circulation of money animates the economic
organism. Or they compared it with speech, which likewise had the function of
facilitating human Verkehr (interchange, trade). Or they made use of juristic
terminology and defined money as a draft by everybody on everybody else.

AppA.1

All these points of view have this in common: they cannot be built into any system
that deals realistically with the processes of economic activity. It is utterly
impossible to employ them as foundations for a theory of exchange. And the
attempt has hardly been made; for it is clear that any endeavor to bring, say, the
doctrine of money as a draft into harmony with any explanation of prices must lead
to disappointing results. If it is desired to have a general name for these attempts to
solve the problem of money, they may be called acatallactic, because no place can
be found for them in catallactics.

AppA.2

The catallactic theories of money, on the other hand, do fit into a theory of
exchange ratios. They look for what is essential in money in the negotiation of
exchanges; they explain its value by the laws of exchange. It should be possible for
every general theory of value to provide a theory of the value of money also, and
for every theory of the value of money to be included in a general theory of value.
The fact that a general theory of value or a theory of the value of money fulfills
these conditions is by no means a proof of its correctness. But no theory can prove
satisfactory if it does not fulfill these conditions.

AppA.3

It may seem strange that acatallactic views on money were not completely
suppressed by the growth of the catallactic doctrine. There were many reasons for
this.

AppA.4

It is not possible to master the problems of theoretical economics unless questions
of the determination of prices (commodity prices, wages, rent, interest, etc.) are at
first dealt with under the supposition of direct exchange, indirect exchange being
temporarily left out of account. This necessity gives rise to a division of the theory
of catallactics into two parts—the doctrine of direct, and that of indirect, exchange.
Now so abundant and difficult are the problems of pure theory, that the opportunity
of putting part of them on one side, at least for the time being, has been very

AppA.5

of putting part of them on one side, at least for the time being, has been very
welcome. So it has come about that most recent investigators have devoted either
no attention at all or very little to the theory of indirect exchange; any way, it has
been the most neglected section of our science. The consequences of this omission
have been most unfortunate. They have been expressed not only in the sphere of
the theory of indirect exchange, the theory of money and banking, but also in the
sphere of the theory of direct exchange. There are problems of theory full
comprehension of which can be attained only with the aid of the theory of indirect
exchange. To seek a solution of these problems, among which, for example, is the
problem of crises, with no instruments but those of the theory of direct exchange, is
inevitably to go astray.
Thus the theory of money was meanwhile surrendered to the acatallactists. Even in
the writings of many catallactic theorists, odd relics of acatallactic views are to be
found. Now and then statements are met with which are not in harmony with their
authors' other statements on the subject of money and exchange and which
obviously have been accepted merely because they were traditional and because the
author had not noticed that they clashed with the rest of his system.

AppA.6

On the other hand, the currency controversy had aroused greater interest than ever
in questions of monetary theory just at the time when the coming modern theory
was devoting very little attention to them. Many "practical men" ventured into this
sphere. Now the practical man without general economic training who begins to
meditate upon monetary problems at first sees nothing else and limits his
investigation to their immediate restricted sphere without taking account of their
connections with other things; it is therefore easy for his monetary theory to
become acatallactic. That the "practical man," so proudly looked down upon by the
professional "theorist," can proceed from investigations of monetary problems to
the most penetrating comprehension of economic theory, is best shown by the
development of Ricardo. The period of which we speak saw no such development.
But it produced writers on monetary theory who did all that was necessary for the
monetary policy of the time. From among a large number it is only necessary to
mention two names—Bamberger and Soetbeer. A considerable portion of their
activity was devoted to fighting the doctrines of contemporary acatallactists.

AppA.7

At present, acatallactic doctrines of money find ready acceptance among those
economists who have no use for "theory." Those who, openly or implicitly, deny
the necessity of theoretical investigation are not in a position to demand of a
monetary doctrine that it should be possible to fit it into a theoretical system.

AppA.8

2 The "State" Theory of Money
The common characteristic of all acatallactic monetary doctrines is a negative one;
they cannot be fitted into any theory of catallactics. This does not mean that they
involve a complete absence of views as to the value of money. Without any such
views, they would not be monetary doctrines at all. But their theories of the value
of money are constructed subconsciously; they are not made explicit; they are not
completely thought out. For if they were consistently thought out to their logical
conclusions, it would become obvious that they were self-contradictory. A
consistently developed theory of money must be merged into a theory of exchange,
and so cease to be acatallactic.

AppA.9

According to the naivest and most primitive of the acatallactic doctrines, the value
of money coincides with the value of the monetary material. But to attempt to go
farther and begin to inquire into the grounds of the value of the precious metals, is
already to have arrived at the construction of a catallactic system. The explanation

AppA.1
0

already to have arrived at the construction of a catallactic system. The explanation
of the value of goods is sought either in their utility or in the difficulty of obtaining
them. In either case, the starting point has been discovered for a theory of the value
of money also. Thus this naive approach, logically developed, conducts us
automatically to the real problems. It is acatallactic, but it leads to catallactics.
Another acatallactic doctrine seeks to explain the value of money by the command
of the state. According to this theory the value of money rests on the authority of
the highest civil power, not on the estimation of commerce.*13 The law commands,
the subject obeys. This doctrine can in no way be fitted into a theory of exchange;
for apparently it would have a meaning only if the state fixed the actual level of the
money prices of all economic goods and services as by means of general price
regulation. Since this cannot be asserted to be the case, the state theory of money is
obliged to limit itself to the thesis that the state command establishes only the
Geltung or validity of the money in nominal units, but not the validity of these
nominal units in commerce. But this limitation amounts to abandonment of the
attempt to explain the problem of money. By stressing the contrast between valor
impositus and bonitas intrinseca, the canonists did indeed make it possible for
scholastic sophistry to reconcile the Roman-canonist legal system with the facts of
economic life. But at the same time they revealed the intrinsic futility of the
doctrine of valor impositus; they demonstrated the impossibility of explaining the
processes of the market with its assistance.

AppA.1

Nevertheless the nominalistic doctrine did not disappear from monetary literature.
The princes of the time, who saw in the debasement of money an important means
of improving their financial position, needed the justification of this theory, If, in
its endeavors to construct a complete theory of the human economy, the struggling
science of economics kept itself free from nominalism, there were nevertheless
always enough nominalists for fiscal needs. At the beginning of the nineteenth
century, nominalism still had representatives in Gentz and Adam Müller, writing in
support of the Austrian monetary policy of the Bankozettel period. And nominalism
was used as a foundation for the demands of the inflationists. But it was to
experience its full renascence in the German "realistic" economics of the twentieth
century.

AppA.1

An acatallactic monetary theory is a logical necessity for the empirico-realistic
trend in economics. Since this school, unfavorable to all "theory," refrains from
propounding any system of catallactics, it is bound to oppose any monetary
doctrine that leads to such a system. So at first it avoided any treatment of the
problem of money whatever; so far as it did touch upon this problem (in its often
admirable work on the history of coinage and in its attitude toward political
questions), it retained the traditional Classical theory of value. But gradually its
views on the problem of money glided unconsciously into the primitive acatallactic
ideas described above, which regard money made of precious metal as a good that
is valuable "in itself." Now this was inconsistent. To a school that has inscribed the
device of etatism on its banner, and to which all eco nomic problems appear as
questions of administration, the state theory of nominalism is more suitable.*14
Knapp completed this connection. Hence the success of his book in Germany.

AppA.1

The fact that Knapp has nothing to say about the catallactic monetary problem, the
problem of purchasing power, cannot be regarded as an objection from the point of
view of a doctrine which repudiates catallactics and has abandoned in advance any
attempt at a causal explanation of the determination of prices. The difficulty over
which the older nominalistic theories had come to grief did not exist for Knapp,

AppA.1

1

2

3

4

able—in fact, considering his public, he was bound—to abandon all attempt at an
explanation of the validity of money in commerce. If important questions of
monetary policy had arisen in Germany in the years immediately succeeding the
appearance of Knapp's work, then the inadequacy of a doctrine that was unable to
say anything about the value of money would naturally have soon become evident.
That the new state theory did compromise itself immediately it was put forward,
was due to its unlucky attempt to deal with currency history from an acatallactic
point of view. Knapp himself, in the fourth chapter of his work, had briefly related
the monetary history of England, France, Germany, and Austria. Works on other
countries followed, by members of his seminar. All of these accounts are purely
formal. They endeavor to apply Knapp's scheme to the individual circumstances of
different states. They provide a history of money in Knappian terminology.

AppA.1

There could be no doubt of the results that were bound to follow from these
attempts. They expose the weaknesses of the state theory. Currency policy is
concerned with the value of money, and a doctrine that cannot tell us anything
about the purchasing power of money is not suitable for dealing with questions of
currency policy. Knapp and his disciples enumerate laws and decrees, but are
unable to say anything about their motives and effects. They do not mention that
there have been parties supporting different currency policies. They know nothing,
or nothing of great importance, about bimetallists, inflationists, or restrictionists;
for them, the supporters of the gold standard were led by "metallistic superstition,"
the opponents of the gold standard were those who were free from "prejudices."
They studiously avoid all reference to commodity prices and wages and to the
effects of the monetary system on production and exchange. Beyond making a few
remarks about the "fixed rate of exchange," they never touch upon the connections
between the monetary standard and foreign trade, the problem which has played so
great a part in currency policy. Never has there been a more miserable and empty
representation of monetary history.

AppA.1

As a result of the World War, questions of currency policy have again become very
important, and the state theory feels itself obliged to produce something on topical
questions of currency policy. That it has nothing more to say about these than about
the currency problems of the past is shown by Knapp's article "Die Währungsfrage
bei einem deutsch-österreichischen Zollbündnis" in the first part of the work
published by the Verein für Sozialpolitik: Die wirtschaftliche Annäherung
zwischen dem deu tschen Reiche und seinen Verbündeten. There can hardly be two
opinions about this essay.

AppA.1

The absurdity of the results at which the nominalistic doctrine of money is bound
to arrive as soon as it begins to concern itself with the problems of monetary policy
is shown by what has been written by Bendixen, one of Knapp's disciples.
Bendixen regards the circumstance that the German currency had a low value
abroad during the war as "even in some ways desirable, because it enabled us to
sell foreign securities at a favourable rate."*15 From the nominalistic point of view
this monstrous assertion is merely logical.

AppA.1

Bendixen, incidentally, is not merely a disciple of the state theory of money; he is
at the same time a representative of that doctrine also which regards money as a
claim. In fact, acatallactic views can be blended according to taste. Thus Dühring,
who in general regards metallic money as "an institution of Nature," holds the
claim theory but at the same time rejects nominalism. *16

AppA.1

The assertion that the state theory of money has been disproved by the events of
currency history since 1914 must not be understood to mean that it has been

AppA.2

5

6

7

8

9

0

currency history since 1914 must not be understood to mean that it has been
disproved by "facts." Facts per se can neither prove nor disprove; everything
depends upon the significance that can be given to the facts. So long as a theory is
not thought out and worked up in an absolutely inadequate manner, then it is not a
matter of supreme difficulty to expound it so as to explain the "facts"—even if only
superficially and in a way that can by no means satisfy truly intelligent criticism. It
is not true, as the naive scientific doctrine of the empirico-realistic school has it,
that one can save oneself the trouble of thinking if one will only allow the facts to
speak. Facts do not speak; they need to be spoken about by a theory.

0

The state theory of money—and all acatallactic theories of money in general—
breaks down not so much because of the facts as because of its inability even to
attempt to explain them. On all the important questions of monetary policy that
have arisen since 1914, the followers of the state theory of money have maintained
silence. It is true that even in this period their industry and zeal have been
demonstrated in the publication of ample works; but they have not been able to say
anything on the problems that occupy us nowadays. What could they, who
deliberately reject the problem of the value of money, have to say about those
problems of value and price which alone constitute all that is important in the
monetary system? Their peculiar terminology does not bring us a step nearer to a
decision about the questions that are agitating the world at present.*17 Knapp is of
the opinion that these questions do not need to be solved except by the
"economists," and concedes that his doctrine has nothing to say about them. *18 But
if the state theory does not help to elucidate the questions that seem important to
us, what is its use? The state theory is not a bad monetary theory; it is not a
monetary theory at all. *19

AppA.2

To ascribe to the state theory a large share of the blame for the collapse of the
German monetary system, does not imply that Knapp directly provoked the
inflationary policy that led to it. He did not do that. Nevertheless, a doctrine that
does not mention the quantity of money at all, that does not speak of the connection
between money and prices, and that asserts that the only thing that is essential in
money is the authentication of the state, directly encourages fiscal exploitation of
the "right" of creating money. What is to prevent a government from pouring more
and more notes into circulation if it knows that this will not affect prices, because
all rises in prices can be explained by "disturbed trade conditions" or "disturbances
in the home market," but on no account whatever by anything to do with money?
Knapp is not so incautious as to speak of the valor impositus of money as did the
canonists and jurists of past generations. All the same, his doctrine and theirs lead
indifferently to the same conclusions.

AppA.2

Knapp, unlike some of his enthusiastic disciples, was certainly not a government
hireling. When he said anything, he said it from genuine personal conviction. That
speaks well for his own trustworthiness, but it has no bearing on that of his
doctrine.

AppA.2

It is quite incorrect to say that the monetary doctrine of etatism springs from
Knapp. The monetary doctrine of etatism is the balance-of-payments theory, which
Knapp only refers to casually in speaking of the "pantopolic origin of the exchange
rates."*20 The balance-of-payments theory, if an untenable, is at least a catallactic,
theory of money. But it was invented long before Knapp's time. It had already been
propounded, with its distinction between the internal value (Binnenwert) and the
external value (Aussenwert) of money, by the etatists, by Lexis, for example.*21
Knapp and his school added nothing to it.

AppA.2

1

2

3

4

But the etatist school is responsible for the facility and rapidity with which the state
theory of money succeeded in becoming the accepted doctrine in Germany,
Austria, and Russia. This school had struck out catallactics, the theory of exchange
and prices, as superfluous from the series of problems with which economics was
concerned; it undertook the attempt to represent all the phenomena of social life
merely as emanations of the exercise of power by princes and others in authorit y. It
is only a logical extension of its doctrine to endeavor eventually to represent money
also as being created merely by force. The younger generation of etatists had so
little notion even of what economics really was concerned with, that it was able to
accept Knapp's paltry discussion as a theory of money.

AppA.2
5

3 Schumpeter's Attempt to Formulate a Catallactic Claim Theory
To call money a claim is to suggest an analogy to which there is no real objection.
Although this comparison, like all others, falls short at certain points, it may
nevertheless make it easier for many to form a conception of the nature of money.
Admittedly analogies are not explanations, and it would be a gross exaggeration to
speak of a claim theory of money, for mere construction of an analogy does not
take us even halfway to any sort of monetary theory that can be expressed in
intelligible arguments. The only possible way of building a monetary theory upon
the claim analogy would be to regard the claim, say, as a ticket of admission to a
room of limited size, so that an increase in the number of tickets issued would
mean a corresponding diminution of the amount of room at the disposal of each
ticketholder. But the danger in this way of thinking is that taking this illustration as
a starting point could lead only to the drawing of a contrast between the total
amount of money and the total amount of commodities; but this amounts to nothing
but one of the oldest and most primitive versions of the quantity theory, the
untenability of which needs no further discussion.

AppA.2

Thus until recently the claim analogy led a precarious existence in the expositions
of monetary doctrine, without having any greater significance—as was imagined—
than that of a means of expression that could easily be understood by all. Even in
the writings of Bendixen, who would have been glad to see his obscure arguments
designated a claim theory, the claim concept has no greater significance ascribed to
it. But very recently an ingenious attempt has been made by Schumpeter to arrive
at a real theory of the value of money starting from the claim analogy, that is, an
attempt to construct a catallactic claim theory.

AppA.2

The fundamental difficulty that has to be reckoned with in every attempt to
construct a theory of the value of money starting from the claim concept is the
necessity for comparing the quantity of money with some other total, just as in the
ticket illustration the total number of tickets is compared with the total amount of
room available. Such a comparison is a necessity for a doctrine which regards
money as "claims" whose peculiarity consists in the fact that they do not refer to
definite objects but to shares in a mass of goods. Schumpeter seeks to avoid this
difficulty by starting, in elaboration of a line of argument first developed by
Wieser, not from the quantity of money, but from the sum of money incomes,
which he compares with the total prices of all consumption goods.*22 There might
be some justification for such a comparison if money had no other use than to
purchase consumption goods. But such an assumption is obviously quite
unjustifiable. Money bears a relationship, not only to consumption goods, but also
to production goods; and—the point is a particularly important one—it does not
serve only for the exchange of production goods against consumption goods but
very much oftener for the exchange of production goods against other production
goods. So Schumpeter is only able to maintain his theory by simply putting out of
consideration a large part of that which circulates as money. He says that

AppA.2

6

7

8

consideration a large part of that which circulates as money. He says that
commodities are actually related only to the circulating portion of the total quantity
of money, that only this portion has an immediate connection with the sum of all
incomes, that it alone fulfills the essential function of money. Thus "to obtain the
quantity of money in circulation, which is what we are concerned with," the
following items, among others, have to be eliminated:
1 Hoards
2 "Sums that are unemployed but awaiting employment"
3 Reserves by which we are to understand those sums of money "below
which the economic agents never let their holdings fall; in order to be
prepared for unexpected demands"

But even the elimination of these sums is not enough; we must go still farther. For
the total incomes theory is "not concerned even with the total quantity of money in
circulation." In addition we must exclude "all those sums that circulate in the
'income-distributing' markets, in the real estate, mortgage, security and similar
markets."*23

AppA.2

These limitations do not merely serve, as Schumpeter thinks, to demonstrate the
impossibility of dealing statistically with the notion of money in effective
circulation; they also cut away the ground from beneath his own theory. All that
needs to be said about the separation of hoards, unemployment sums, and reserves,
from the remain ing amount of money has already been mentioned above.*24 It is
inadmissible to speak of "sums that are unemployed but awaiting employment." In
a strict and exact sense—and theory must take everything in a strict and exact
sense—all money that is not changing owners at the very moment under
consideration is awaiting employment. Nevertheless, it would be incorrect to call
such money "unemployed"; as part of a reserve it satisfies a demand for money,
and consequently fulfills the characteristic function of money. And when
Schumpeter further proposes to eliminate the sums in circulation in the incomedistributing markets, we can only ask, What then remains?

AppA.3

Schumpeter has to do violence to his own theory in order to make it appear even
fairly tenable. It cannot be compared with the point of view which opposes the total
stock of money to the total demand for it (that is, to the total demand of economic
agents for reserves), because it does not really attempt to solve more than a small
part of the problem. To be of any use, a theory must try to explain the whole of the
problem that is before us. Schumpeter's theory arbitrarily splits up the stock of
money and the demand for money in order to institute a comparison that would
otherwise be impossible. If Schumpeter starts from the statement that the total
quantity of money is distributed between three spheres, the sphere of circulation,
that of hoards and reserves, and that of capital, then, if he wishes to provide a
complete theory of money, the comparison which he makes for the sphere of
circulation between total incomes and total amount of consumption goods should
be repeated for the two other spheres also; for these also are not without
significance in the determination of the value of money. Variations in the amount
of money demanded or available for hoards and reserves—to retain this vague
distinction—or for the sphere of capital, influence the value of money just as much
as variations in the sphere of circulation. No theory of the value of money with
pretensions to completeness dare omit an explanation of the influence on the value
of money exerted by processes in the sphere of hoards and reserves and in that of
capital.

AppA.3

9

0

1

We see, then, that even Schumpeter has not been able to make a complete
catallactic theory of money out of the claim theory. The fact that his attempt to
make the claim theory into a catallactic theory of money obliged him to set such
extraordinary limits to the problem is the best proof that a comprehensive
catallactic theory of money cannot be constructed on the basis of the claim analogy.
His having arrived in the course of his admirable discussion at conclusions for the
rest which do not differ essentially from those which have been discovered in other
ways and with other instruments by the catallactic doctrine of money is merely to
be ascribed to his having found them in the theory of money already and having
therefore been able to adopt them. They by no means follow from the fragmentary
theory of money that he himself has put forward.

AppA.3
2

4 "Metallism"
It is no longer necessary to continue to argue against the nominalistic theory of
money. For theoretical economics it has long been finished with. Nevertheless, the
nominalist controversy has propagated errors in the history of doctrine that need to
be weeded out.

AppA.3

First of all, there is the use of the term metallism. The expression comes from
Knapp. "Those writers who start from weight and fineness and see in the stamp
nothing but an attestation of these properties," Knapp christens metallists. "The
metallist defines the unit of value as a certain quantity of metal."*25

AppA.3

This definition of metallism given by Knapp is by no means a clear one. It should
be pretty well known that there can hardly have been a single writer worth
mentioning who has thought of the unit of value as consisting of a quantity of
metal. But it must be remembered that, with the exception of the nominalists, there
has never been a school so easily satisfied in the interpretation of the concept of
value as that of Knapp, for whom the unit of value "is nothing but the unit in which
the amount of payments is expressed."*26

AppA.3

But it is easy to see what Knapp means by metallism even if he does not explicitly
say it. For Knapp metallism is all the theories of money that are not nominalistic;*27
and since he formulates the nominalistic doctrine with precision, it is clear what he
understands by metallism. That those theories of money which are not nominalistic
have no uniform characteristic, that there are catallactic and acatallactic theories
among them, that each of these two groups is again divided into various opposed
doctrines, is either unknown to Knapp, or willfully overlooked by him. For him, all
nonnominalistic theories of money are but one. Nowhere in his writing is there
anything to suggest that he knows of the existence of other monetary doctrines than
that which regards metallic money as material valuable "in itself." He even
completely ignores the existence of economic theories of value—not merely the
existence of any particular theory but the existence of all of them. He invariably
polemizes against the only theory of money known to him, which he believes to be
the only theory opposed to nominalism, and which he calls metallism. His
arguments are useless because they apply only to this one acatallactic doctrine
which, with all other acatallactic theories, including nominalism, was long ago
overthrown by economic science.

AppA.3

All controversial writers have to set themselves limits. In any field that has been
much worked over it is impossible to confute all opposing views. The most
important opposing opinions, the typical ones, those which seem to threaten most
one's own point of view, must be selected, and the rest passed over in silence.
Knapp writes for the German public of the present day, which, under the influence
of the etatistic version of political economy, acquainted only with acatallactic

AppA.3

3

4

5

6

7

of the etatistic version of political economy, acquainted only with acatallactic
theories of money, and even among these only with those which he calls
metallistic. The success that he has met with here shows that he was right in
directing his criticism only against this version, which is hardly represented in
literature, and on the other hand in ignoring Bodin, Law, Hume, Senior, Jevons,
Menger, Walras, and everybody else.
Knapp makes no attempt at all to determine what economics says about money. He
only asks, "What does the educated man think of when he is asked about the nature
of money?"*28 He then criticizes the views of the "educated man," that is,
apparently, the layman. Nobody will deny him the right to do this. But it is not
permissible, having done it, to set up these views of the educated man as those of
scientific economics. Nevertheless, this is what Knapp does when he describes the
monetary theory of Adam Smith and David Ricardo as "entirely metallistic" and
adds: "This theory teaches that the unit of value (the pound sterling) is definable as
a certain weight of metal."*29 The mildest thing that can be said about this assertion
of Knapp's is that it is entirely unfounded. It most bluntly contradicts the views of
Smith and Ricardo on the theory of value, and it does not find the least support in
any of their writings. It will be obvious to all who have even only a superficial
acquaintance with the value theory of the Classicals and their theory of money that
Knapp has here committed an incomprehensible error.

AppA.3

But neither were the Classicals "metallists" in the sense that their only contribution
to the problems of paper money was "indignation."*30 Adam Smith expounded the
social advantages arising from the "substitution of paper in the room of gold and
silver money" in a manner that has hardly been equaled by any writer before or
after him. *31 But it was Ricardo, in his pamphlet "Proposals for an Economical and
Secure Currency," published in 1816, who elaborated this point of view and
recommended a monetary system under which precious-metal money should be
entirely eliminated from actual domestic circulation. This suggestion of Ricardo's
was the basis of that monetary system, first established at the end of the last
century in India, then in the Straits Settlements, then in the Philippines, and fina lly
in Austria -Hungary, that is usually known nowadays as the gold-exchange
standard. Knapp and his fellow enthusiasts for "modern monetary theory" could
easily have avoided the mistakes they made in explaining the policy followed by
the Austro-Hungarian Bank between 1900 and 1911, if they had taken note of what
Smith and Ricardo had said in these passages.*32

AppA.3

8

9

5 The Concept of "Metallism" in Wieser and Philippovich
Knapp's mistakes in the history of theory have unfortunately already been accepted
by other writers. This started with the attempt to expound Knapp's theory in the
most kindly manner possible, that is, to judge its weaknesses gently and if possible
to credit it with some sort of usefulness. But this was not possible without reading
into the state theory things that simply cannot be found in it, things in fact which
definitely contradict both its spirit and its letter, or without taking over Knapp's
mistakes in the history of theory.

AppA.4

First, Wieser must be mentioned. Wieser draws a contrast between two monetary
theories. "For the metallists, money has an independent value, arising from itself,
from its substance; for modern theory, its value is derived from that of the objects
of exchange, the commodities."*33 Again, in another place, Wieser says: "The value
of the monetary material is a conflux from two different sources. It is constituted
from the use value which the monetary material obtains by reason of its various
industrial employments—for jewelry, for utensils, for technical uses of all kinds—
and from the exchange value which the money obtains by reason of being a means

AppA.4

0

1

and from the exchange value which the money obtains by reason of being a means
of payment ... The service performed by the coins as a medium of exchange and
that performed by the money in its industrial uses, lead in combination to a
common estimate of its value ... We may ... assert, that each of the two services is
independent enough to be able to go on existing even if the other ceased. Just as the
industrial functions of gold would not cease if gold were no longer coined, so its
monetary functions would not come to an end if the state decided to forbid its use
in industry and requisitioned it all for minting ... The dominant metallistic opinion
is different. From this point of view, the metal value of the money means the same
thing as the use value of the metal; it has only the one source—industrial
employment—and if the exchange value of the money coincides with its metal
value, then it is nothing but a reflection of the use value of the metal. According to
the prevailing metallistic opinion, money made from valueless material is
inconceivable; for, it is said, money could not measure the value of commodities if
it was not valuable itself, by virtue of the material from which it is made."*34
Here Wieser contrasts two theories of the value of money: the modern and the
metallistic. The theory which he calls the modern is the monetary theory that
logically follows from that theory of value which traces value to utility. Now since
the utility theory has only recently received scientific exposition (to have
contributed to which is one of Wieser's great merits), and since it undoubtedly may
nowadays be regarded as the prevailing doctrine (pace Wieser himself, who calls
metallism the prevailing doctrine), it may well be admissible to call that monetary
theory which is based upon it the modern theory
. But in so doing
we must not forget that, just as the subjective theory of value can look back over a
long history, so also the theory of money corresponding to it is already more than
two hundred years old. For example, as early as the year 1705 John Law had
expressed it in classical form in his Money and Trade. A comparison of Law's
arguments with those of Wieser will demonstrate the fundamental agreement
between their views.*35

AppA.4

But this theory, which Wieser calls the modern, is certainly not the doctrine of
Knapp; in Knapp, not the slightest suggestion of it can be discovered. All that it has
in common with his nominalism, which ignores the problem of the value of money,
is the fact that neither is "metallistic."

AppA.4

Wieser himself sees quite clearly that his theory has nothing to do wit h that of
Knapp. Unfortunately however, he takes over from Knapp the opinion that
according to the "prevailing metallistic opinion," the "metal value of the money
means the same as the use value of the metal." Several serious mistakes in the
history of theory are here all mixed up together.

AppA.4

The first thing to observe is that by metallism Wieser means something different
from Knapp. Wieser contrasts the "modern" theory of the value of money with the
"metallistic," and describes exactly what he understands by the terms. According to
this, the two views are opposed to each other; the one excludes the other. But, for
Knapp, the theory that Wieser calls the modern theory is just as metallistic as the
others. The truth of this can easily be demonstrated.

AppA.4

In his principal book, Knapp never mentions the names of any writers who
themselves have dealt with the problem of money; neither does he quote any work
on the subject. He nowhere argues against any of the trains of thought that are
usually met with in the abundant literature of money. His quarrel is always only
with the metallism that he sets up as the general opinion on money. In his preface,
it is true, he refers expressly to two writers as metallists: Hermann and Knies.*36 But
both Hermann and Knies expounded theories very similar to the "modern" theory

AppA.4

2

3

4

5

6

both Hermann and Knies expounded theories very similar to the "modern" theory
expounded by Wieser. This should not appear strange, for both of these writers take
their stand on the subjective theory of value,*37 from which the "modern" doctrine of
the value of money logically follows, so that both regard the foundation of the usevalue of the precious metals as lying both in their monetary uses and their "other"
uses.*38 Between Wieser and Knies there is a difference, it is true, concerning the
effect on the monetary function of the possibility of cessation of the "other"
functions. Yet Knapp could not have regarded this as the decisive characteristic, or
he would have been sure to mention it somewhere, and in fact he has nothing more
to say about it than about any other problem of the value of money.
It is, indeed, not among the economists that we must seek the metallists, as they are
portrayed by Knapp and his school. Knapp knows very well why he always argues
only against this arbitrary caricature of a metallist, and prudently refrains from
quoting chapter and verse for the opinions that he puts in the mouth of this
metallist. In fact the metallist that Knapp has in mind is none other than Knapp
himself; not the Knapp that wrote the State Theory of Money, but the Knapp that,
"disregarding all theory" as he himself testifies, used to lecture on the "pragmatic"
of the monetary system;*39 the Knapp that, as one of the standard-bearers of
historicism in political economy, had thought that a substitute for thinking about
economic problems could be found in the publication of old documents. If Knapp
had not looked down so arrogantly on the work of the much abused "theorists," if
he had not disdained to have anything to do with it, he would have discovered that
he had been entertaining an entirely false opinion of its content. The same is true of
Knapp's disciples. Indeed, their leader Bendixen openly admits that he was once a
"metallist."*40

AppA.4

It is by no means desirable to follow Wieser's example in giving the title of
prevailing doctrine to the view that the value of the monetary material arises solely
from its industrial employment. Surely a view concerning money that has been
rejected by Knies cannot be regarded as the prevailing doctrine.*41 There can be no
question that the whole literature of money, so far as it is based on the conclusions
of modern theory is not metallistic in Wieser's sense; but neither, for that matter, is
any other catallactic theory of money.

AppA.4

In fact Wieser's opinion of the monetary theories of his precursors has been
distorted by his acceptance of the expression metallism. He himself did not fail to
notice this; for he supplements the remarks quoted above with the following words:
"The dominant doctrine does not remain true to itself, for it ... develops a special
theory to explain the exchange value of money. If the value of money was always
limited by the use value of the metal, what influence would remain to be exerted by
the demand for money the velocity of circulation, or the amount of credit
substitutes?" The solution of this apparent contradiction must be sought in the fact
that what Wieser calls the prevailing metallistic doctrine is in the very sharpest
contrast to those catallactic theories which "develop a special theory to explain the
exchange value of money."

AppA.4

Like Wieser, Philippovich also draws a contrast between two theories of the value

AppA.5

7

8

9

0

historical views of Knapp, Philippovich falls into the same errors as Wieser.
While Wieser rejects the chartal and nominal theory of money, Philippovich
confesses his allegiance to it, but at the same time interprets it in a way that entirely
effaces the difference between the catallactic and the nominalistic conception. On
the one hand, he declares that "the essential thing about the monetary unit is its
nominal Geltung or validity as a unit of value." And on the other hand, he says that
"the monetary unit is not really this technically defined quantity of precious metal,
but its power of purchase or payment."*44 These are two theses that cannot be
reconciled. We have already met the former, as Knapp's definition; the latter is the
starting point of all catallactic theories of money. A sharper contrast could hardly
be imagined.

AppA.5

That the identification of the monetary unit with purchasing power, so far from
expressing Knapp's views, completely contradicts them, may be clearly deduced
from several passages in his writings.*45 The very thing that characterizes
nominalism—like all acatallactic theory in general—is the fact that it does not
speak of the value, the purchasing power, of money. It is easy to show how
irreconcilable are the two theses that Philippovich propounds. Within the limits of
his own theory, Knapp is formally correct when he defines the mark as "the third
part of the preceding unit of value, the thaler."*46 However uninformative this
definition may be, it contains nothing contradictory in itself. It is otherwise when
Philippovich declares that "the silver mark, as the third part of the thaler, was
previously the unit of money for reckoning purposes, which, in the experience of
economic agents, represented a certain purchasing power. This purchasing power
had to be retained in the unit of coinage of the new metal; that is, the mark as a
gold coin had to represent the same quantity of value as had previously been
represented by the silver mark. The technical determination of the unit of coinage
therefore has the aim of maintaining the value of the monetary unit."*47 These
sentences, in connection with those previously quoted, can apparently only mean
that the reform of the German monetary system had aimed to establish the
purchasing power of the thaler at its transmitted level. But this can hardly be
Philippovich's real opinion.

AppA.5

There is yet another historical error that has been taken over by Philippovich from
Knapp, namely, the belie f that the catallactic doctrine of money disregards actual
experience, "which provides examples enough of the forced circulation of state
paper money."*48 Any catallactic writing, including the first edition of the present
book, which is the only work referred to by Philippovich in this connection, would
prove the contrary. It is possible to assert that the catallactists have not solved the
problem of such paper money in a satisfactory manner—that is still an open
question; but it will not do to assert that they have disregarded its existence. This is
a particularly important point, because many of Knapp's disciples think that
catallactic theories of money have been confuted by the paper-money economics of
the war period; as if this was not a problem that has been dealt with by all monetary
theories since Ricardo.

AppA.5

When Knapp's mistakes about the views on monetary theory of earlier and
contemporary economists have been accepted by two such eminent experts in the
history and literature of political economy as Wieser and Philippovich, it should
not surprise us if the majority of those now at work in Germany on monetary
problems base their history of theory entirely on Knapp.

AppA.5

6 Note: The Relation of the Controversy About Nominalism to the Problems of
the Two English Schools of Banking Theory

1

2

3

4

A writer identifies the metallistic theory with the currency principle and calls the
chartal theory "a variety of the old banking principle."*49 Again, another writer is of
the opinion that there is "a certain justification for giving the name of economic
nominalism to the doctrine of the Currency School, so far as it is based upon a like
treatment of both metallic and paper money."*50 Both would appear to be mistaken.
The opposition between the two famous schools of the theory of credit lies in quite
another sphere.*51 Knapp and his disciples have never so much as perceived the
problems with which they were concerned, much less attempted to solve them.
Bendixen's doctrine of the creation of money, which is connected only accidentally
and loosely with Knapp's nominalism, is admittedly nothing but an exaggerated
and extremely naive version of the Banking principle. It is a particularly
characteristic sign of the low state of German economic theory that for many years
Bendixen's doctrine could have been regarded as something new without it being
remarked that it was at most only in the way in which it was expounded that it
differed from the doctrine that had been predominant in Germany for decades.

AppA.5
5

APPENDIX B
Translator's Note on the Translation of Certain Technical Terms
It is never possible to be certain that the full significance of a technical term has
been brought out in a translation. A short list of the original German terms for the
kinds of money and money substitutes mentioned in the present work, and of the
English expressions which have been used to translate them, is therefore appended.

AppB.1

The word Umlaufsmittel presented a peculiarly difficult problem. There is no
established English equivalent for the sense in which Professor Mises uses the
term. "Circulating medium," the literal translation, is clearly inappropriate, for it
suggests associations with currency which are quite foreign to Professor Mises'
meaning. "Bank money" is inadequate, for Umlaufsmittel includes, not merely bank
deposits, but also money substitutes issued by the state (such as token money).
"Credit instrument," which at first sight might appear satisfactory, is inconsistent
with Professor Mises' insistence on the difference between Umlaufsmitteln and bills
of exchange; and, furthermore, Professor Mises explicitly argues that the issue of
Umlaufsmitteln is not a credit transaction in the more fundamental sense. For want
of a better equivalent, therefore, the expression "fiduciary medium" has been
adopted. It accords with Professor Mises' definition of Umlaufsmitteln as money
substitutes not covered by money,*52 and it evokes associations with the
controversies about the Peel Act of 1844 that are in harmony with Professor Mises'
attitude. It also draws attention to Professor Mises' emphasis upon the similarity
between uncovered bank deposits and uncovered notes.

AppB.2

The following equivalents for other technical terms have also been adopted:*53

AppB.3

Money in the broader sense (Geld im weiteren Sinne)
Money in the narrower sense (Geld im engeren Sinne)
Money substitute (Geldsurrogat )
Commodity money (Sachgeld)
Credit money (Kreditgeld)
Fiat money (Zeichengeld)
Token money (Scheidemünzen)
Money certificate (Geldzertifikat)
Commodity credit (Sachkredit)
Circulation credit (Zirkulationskredit)

The following diagram shows the relationships between some of these terms in
Professor Mises' system:

AppB.4

Biographical Note
Ludwig von Mises (1881-1973) was the acknowledged leader of the Austrian
School of economic thought, a prodigious originator in economic theory, and a
prolific author. A library of his books would total twenty-one volumes if confined
to first editions, forty-eight volumes if all revised editions and translations were
included, and still more if the Festschriften and other volumes containing
contributions by him were added.

B.1

Von Mises' writings and lectures encompassed economic theory, history,
epistemology, government, and political philosophy. His contributions to economic
theory include important clarifications on the quantity theory of money, the theory
of the trade cycle, the integration of monetary theory with economic theory in
general, and a demonstration that socialism must fail because it cannot solve the
problem of economic calculation. Mises was the first scholar to recognize that
economics is part of a larger science of human action, a science which Mises called
"praxeology".

B.2

Ludwig von Mises received doctorates in law and economics from the University
of Vienna in 1906. In 1909 he became Economic Advisor to the Austrian Chamber
of Commerce (comparable to the U.S. Department of Commerce). After serving in
World War I, he became Professor of Economics at the University of Vienna and,
in 1934, Professor of International Relations at the Graduate Institute of
International Studies in Geneva. In 1945 he became Visiting Professor at New
York University where he remained until his retirement in 1969. In a lecturing and
teaching career that spanned many continents and more than half a century, Mises
numbered among his students one Nobel Laureate, F. A. Hayek, two presidents of
the American Economic Association, Gottfried Haberler and Fritz Machlup, and
many other economists of international reputation.

B.3

His major works are The Theory of Money and Credit (1912), Socialism (1922),
Human Action (1949), Theory and History (1957), Epistemological Problems of
Economics (1960), and The Ultimate Foundations of Economic Science (1962).

B.4

Murray N. Rothbard, who wrote the Introduction, is Professor of Economics at the
Polytechnic Institute of New York. He is the author of Man, Economy, and State,
America's Great Depression, and many other books, essays, and articles.

B.5

Notes

14*

Mises's original notes, color-coded blue in the text, are unbracketed and unlabeled in the footnote file.
Also color-coded blue and unbracketed are notes in sections written by others: Batson's Appendix B, the
Foreward,
and
Introduction.
14*
[Batson's notes, color-coded gold in the text, are bracketed in the footnote file, and initialed H.E.B.]
*
Occasional website (Library of Economics and Liberty) Editor's notes, color-coded red in the text, are
unbracketed and indicated by asterisks without numbers in the text.
Frontmatter
1. The English translation of Menger's Grundsätze only first appeared in 1950. See Carl Menger, Principles of
Economics (New York: New York University Press, 1981).
2. The first complete English translation of the third/fourth German edition, by George D. Hunke and Hans F.
Sennholz, was published by Libertarian Press, South Holland, III., in 1959; it includes: Volume I, History and Critique
of Interest Theories; Volume II, Positive Theory of Capital; and Volume III, Further Essays on Capital and Interest.
3. Except for one minor change of tense. In the second edition, the author prefaced the first major division of the last
chapter of part three with a note to the effect that this section was to be read as referring to the time about 1912,
when it was originally written. In the present edition, in order to prevent certain misunderstandings that seemed
possible even if this note had been reprinted in its proper place on p. 406, certain practices and circumstances
(especially in sections 4 to 8) have been described in the past tense. (Cf. pp. 406 n. z, 416 n., and also 429 n.)
4. See Altmann, "Zur deutschen Geldlehre des 19. Jahrhunderts," in Die Entwickl ung der deutschen
Volkswirtschaftslehre im 19. Jahrhundert, Schmoller Festschrift (Leipzig, 1908).
5. See Döring, Die Geldtheorien seit Knapp, 1st ed. (Greifswald, 1921; 2d ed. Greifswald, 1922); Palyi, Der Streit um
die Staatliche Theorie des Geldes (Munich and Leipzig, 1922) (also in Schmoller's Jahrbuch, 45. Jahrgang). Also see
the acute investigations of G. M. Verrijn Stuart, Inleiding tot de Leer der Waardevastheid van het Geld ('s
Gravenhage, 1919).
Part I, Chapter 1
1. See Wicksell, Über Wert, Kapital und Rente (Jena, 1893; London, 1933), pp. 50 f.
2. The conclusion that indirect exchange is necessary in the majority of cases is extremely obvious. As we should
expect, it is among the earliest discoveries of economics. We find it clearly expressed in the famous fragment of the
Pandects of Paulus: "Quia non semper nec facile concurrebat, ut, cum tu haberas, quod ego desiderarem, invicem
haberem, quod tu accipere velles" (Paulus, lib. 33 ad edictum 1.I pr. D. de contr. empt. 18, I).
Schumpeter is surely mistaken in thinking that the necessity for money can be proved solely from the assumption of
indirect exchange (see his Wesen und Hauptinhalt der theoretischen Nationalökonomie [Leipzig, 1908], pp. 273 ff.).
On this point, cf. Weiss, Die moderne Tende nz in der Lehre vom Geldwert, Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik
und Verwaltung, vol. 19, pp. 518 ff.
3. See Menger, Untersuchungen über die Methode der Sozialwissenschaften und der politischen Okonomie
insbesondere (Leipzig, 1883), pp. 172 ff.; Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre, 2d ed. (Vienna, 1923), pp. 247 ff.
4. See Menger, Grundsätze, pp. 278 ff.
5. See Nicholson, A Treatise on Money and Essays on Present Monetary Problems (Edinburgh, 1888), pp. 22 ff.;
Laughlin, The Principles of Money (London, 1903), pp. 22 f.
6. Cf. Menger, Grundsätze, pp. 284 ff.
7. That is, apart from the exceptional propensity to hoard gold, silver, and foreign bills, encouraged by inflation and
the laws enacted to further it.
8. Knies in particular (Geld und Kredit, 2d ed. [Berlin, 1885], vol. 1, pp. 233 ff.) has laid stress upon the function of
money as interlocal transmitter of value.
9. Cf. Menger, Grundsätze, pp. 282 f.
Part I, Chapter 2

10. See Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1907), p. 35; Schumpeter, Wesen und Hauptinhalt der
theoretischen Nationalökonomie (Leipzig, 1908), p. 50.
11. Cf. Böhm-Bawerk, "Grundzüge der Theorie des wirtschaftlichen Güterwertes," Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie
und Statistik (1886), New Series, vol. 13, p. 48.
12. See Cuhel, Zur Lehre von den Bedürfnissen (Innsbruck, 1906), pp. 186 ff.; Weiss, Die moderne Tendenz in der
Lehre vom Geldwert, Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung, vol. 19, pp. 532 ff. In the last edition
of his masterpiece Capital and Interest, revised by himself, Böhm-Bawerk endeavored to refute Cuhel's criticism, but
did not succeed in putting forward any new considerations that could help toward a solution of the problem (see
Kapital und Kapitalzins, 3d ed. [Innsbruck, 1909-12], pp. 331 ff. Exkurse, pp. 280 ff.).
13. See Fisher,Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Prices, Transactions of the Connecticut
Academy (New Haven, 1892), vol. 9, pp. 14 ff.
14. See also Weiss, op. cit., p. 538.
15. Cf. Schumpeter,op. cit., p. 290.
16. Cf. further Weiss,op. cit., pp. 534 ff.
17. See also Clark, Essentials of Economic Theory (New York, 1907), p. 41. In the first German edition of the present
work, the above argument contained two further sentences that summarized in an inadequate fashion the results of
investigation into the problem of total value. In deference to certain criticisms of C. A. Verrijn Stuart (Die Grundlagen
der Volkswirtschaft [Jena, 1923], p. 115), they were omitted from the second edition.
18. On the indispensability of money for economic calculation, see my book Die Gemeinwirtschaft: Untersuchungen
über den Sozialismus(Jena, 1922), pp. 100 ff.
19. [This chapter deals with technical matters which may present difficulty to readers unacquainted with general
economic theory. It may be omitted on a first reading, but it is essential to complete understanding of certain issues,
such as the index-number problem, which are dealt with later.—Editor.]
Part I, Chapter 3
20. See Böhm -Bawerk, Rechte und Verhältnisse (Innsbruck, 1881), pp. 120 ff.
21. Wagner, Beiträge zur Lehre von den Banken (Leipzig, 1857), pp. 34 ff.
22. For instance, Helfferich, Das Geld, 6th ed. (Leipzig, 1923), pp. 267 ff.; English trans., Money (London, 1927), pp.
284 ff.
23. See Laughlin, The Principles of Money (London, 1903), pp. 516 ff.
24. See Kalkmann, Englands Übergang zur Goldwährung im 18. Jahrhundert (Strassburg, 1895), pp. 64 ff.;
Schmoller, "Über die Ausbildung einer richtigen Scheidemünzpolitik vom 14. bis zum 19. Jahrhundert," Jahrbuch für
Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft im Deutschen Reich 24 (1900): 1247-74; Helfferich, Studien über
Geld und Bankwessen (Berlin, 1900), pp. 1-37.
25. On the concepts of commodity money, credit money, and fiat money, see sec. 3 of this chap.
26. On the nature of token coinage, see Say, Cours complet d'économie politique pratique, 3d ed. (Paris, 1852), vol,
1, p. 408; and Wagner, Theoretische Sozialökonomik (Leipzig, 1909), Part II pp. 504 ff. Very instructive discussions
are to be found in the memoranda and debates that preceded the Belgian Token Coinage Act of 1860. In the
memorandum of Pirmez, the nature of modern convertible token coins is characterized as follows: "With this property
(of convertibility) the coins are no longer merely coins; they become claims, promises to pay. The holder no longer
has a mere property right to the coin itself [jus in re ]; he has a claim against the state to the amount of the nominal
value of the coin [jus ad rem], a right which he can exercise at any moment by demanding its conversion. Token
coins cease to be money and become a credit instrument [une institution de crédit], banknotes inscribed on pieces of
metal ..." (see Loi décrétant la fabrication d'une monnaie d'appoint ... précédée des notes sur la monnaie de billon en
Belgique ainsi que la discussion de la loi à la Chambre des Représentants [Brussels, 1860], p. 50).
27. The silver gulden in Austria -Hungary held the same position as the silver thaler in Germany from 1873 to 1907. I t
was legal tender, but economically a claim to money, since the bank-of-issue in fact always cashed it on demand.
28. See my articles "Das Problem gesetzlicher Aufnahme der Barzahlungen in Österreich-Ungarn," Jahrbuch für
Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Vol kswirtschaft im Deutschen Reich 33 (1909): 985-1037; "Zum Problem
gesetzlicher Aufnahme der Barzahlungen in Österreich-Ungarn," ibid. 34 (1910): 1877-84; "The Foreign Exchange

Policy of the Austro-Hungarian Bank," Economic Journal 19 (1909): 202-11; "Das vierte Privilegium der
Österreichisch-Ungarischen Bank," Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung 21 (1922): 611-24.
29. See esp. Hammer, Die Hauptprinzipien des Geld-und Währungswesens und die Lösung der Valutafrage (Vienna,
1891), pp. 7 ff.; Gesell, Die Anpassung des Geldes und seiner Verwaltung an die Bedürfnisse des modernen
Verkehres (Buenos Aires, 1897), pp. 21 ff.; Knapp, Staatliche Theorie des Geldes, 3d ed. (Munich, 1921), pp. 20 ff.
30. See Luschin, Allgemeine Münzkunde und Geldgeschichte des Mittelalters und der neureren Zeit (Munich, 1904),
P. 215; Babelon, La théorie féodale de la monnaie (Extrait des mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et BellesLettres, vol. 38, Part I [Paris, 1908], p. 35).
31. For important references, see Babelon, op. cit., p. 35.
32. See Seidler, "Die Schwankungen des Geldwertes und die juristische Lehre von dem Inhalt der Geldschulden,"
Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik (1894), 3d. Series, vol. 7, p. 688.
33. For earlier conditions in Russia, see Gelesnoff, Grundzüge der Volkswirtschaftslehre, trans. into German by
Altschul (Leipzig, 1918), p. 357.
34. See Luschin, op. cit., pp. 221 f.
35. Ibid., p. 155; Endemann, Studien in der romanisch-kanonistischen Wirtschafts-und Rechtslehre bis gegen Ende
des 17. Jahrhunderts (Berlin, 1874), vol. 1, pp. 180 ff.
36. Chevalier, Cours d'économie politique, III., La monnaie (Paris, 1850), pp. 21 ff; Goldschmidt, Handbuch des
Handelsrechts (Erlangen, 1868), vol. 1, Part II, pp. 1073 ff.
Part I, Chapter 4
37. Knapp, Staatliche Theorie des Geldes (3d. ed., 1921); trans. into English by H. M. Lucas and J. Bonar as The
State Théory of Money (London, 1924).
38. See Helfferich, Das Geld, 6th ed. (Leipzig, 1923), p. 294; English trans., Money (London, 1927), p. 312.
39. See Helfferich, Die Reform des deutschen Geldwesens nach der Gründung des Reiches (Leipzig, 1898), vol. 1,
pp. 307 ff; Lotz, Geschichte und Kritik des deutschen Bankgesetzes vom 14. März 1875 (Leipzig, 1888), pp. 137 ff.
40. See Subercaseaux, Essai sur la nature du papier monnaie (Paris, 1909), pp. 5 ff.
Part I, Chapter 5
41. See Menger, Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre, 2d ed. (Vienna, 1923), pp. 20 ff.; Wieser, Über den Ursprung
und die Hauptgesetze des wirtschaftlichen Wertes (Vienna, 1884), pp. 42 ff.
42. Roscher, System der Volkswirtschaft, ed. Pöhlmann, 24th ed. (Stuttgart, 1906), vol. 1, p. 123.
43. See Knies, Geld und Kredit, 2d ed. (Berlin, 1885), vol. 1, pp. 20 ff.
44. See Helfferich, Das Geld, 6th ed. (Leipzig, 1923), pp. 264 f.; Money (London, 1924),
45. E.g. Philippovich, Grundriss der politischen Ökonomie 1st-3d eds. (Tübingen, 1907), vol. 2; Wagner,
Theoretische Sozialökonomik (Leipzig, 1909), vol. 2, Part 2 p. 1.
46. The older meaning, at least the only earlier meaning in literature, appears to have been that relating to the sale of
goods. It is remarkable that even Grimm's Dictionary, vol. 12, published in 1891, contains no mention of the meaning
relating to transportation.
47. See J. S. Mill, Principles of Political Economy (London, 1867), p. 16; Böhm -Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins, pp.
10 ff.
48. Wieser, Über den Ursprung und die Hauptgesetze des wirtschaftlichen Wertes, p. 47. See also Böhm-Bawerk,
op. cit., pp. 131 f.; Clark, The Distribution of Wealth (New York, 1908), p. 11.
49. Böhm-Bawerk, op. cit., Part II pp. 131 ff. See also, on the historical aspect, Jacoby, Der Streit um den
Kapitalsbegriff (Jena, 1908), pp. 90 ff; Spiethoff, "Die Lehre vom Kapital," Schmoller-Festschrift Die Entwicklung der
deutschen Volkswirtschaftslehre im 19. Jahrhundert (Leipzig, 1908), vol. 4, p. 26.

50. See Jacoby, op. cit., pp. 59 f.
51. See Böhm -Bawerk, op. cit., p. 125 n.
52. Ibid., p. 132 n.
53. Böhm-Bawerk, Rechte und Verhältnisse, pp. 36 ff.
54. Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Cannan's ed. (London, 1930).
55. This is true even bearing in mind the discussions of Menger and Clark. But in any case, an investigation, both of
this matter and of the problems dealt with in part 3, chap. 19, which started from Menger's or Clark's capital concept
would lead eventually to the same result as one based on Böhm-Bawerk's definition.
56. See Böhm -Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins, pp. 54 f.
57. I, 3, 23.
58. See Böhm -Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins, Part I, pp. 16 ff., Part II, p p. 23 ff.
59. Ibid., Part II pp. 54 f., 130 ff.
Part I, Chapter 6
60. On the history of such ideas, see Hildebrand, Die Nationalökonomie der Gegenwart und Zunkunft (Frankfurt,
1848), pp. 118 ff.; Roscher, System der Volkswirtschaft, ed. Pöhlmann, 24th ed. (Stuttgart, 1906), vol. 1, pp. 345 f.;
Marx, Das Kapital, 7th ed. (Hamburg, 1914), vol. 1, pp. 95 f. n.
61. More, Utopia.
62. See Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomie, ed. Kautsky (Stuttgart, 1897), pp. 70 if.; Knies, Geld und Kredit,
2d ed. (Berlin, 1885), vol. 1, pp. 239 ff.; Aucuy, Les systèmes socialistes d'Éxchange (Paris, 1908), pp. 114 ff.
63. See the three memoranda published in 1889 in Brussels by Solvay under the title La monnaie et le Compte, and
also his Gesellschaftlicher Comptabilismus (Brussels, 1897). Solvay's theories also contain various other
fundamental errors.
Part II, Chapter 7
1. See Böhm -Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins, pp. 211 ff.
2. See Walsh, The Fundamental Problem in Monetary Science (New York, 1903), p. 11; and in like manner,
Spiethoff, "Die Quantitätstheorie insbesondere in ihrer Verwertbarkeit als Haussetheorie," Festgaben für Adolf
Wagner (Leipzig, 1905), p. 256.
3. See Rau, Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre, 6th ed. (Leipzig, 1855), p. 80.
4. See Böhm -Bawerk, op. cit., Part II, p. 275. And similarly in Wieser, Der natürliche Wert, p. 45; "Der Geldwert und
seine Veränderungen," Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik 132: 507.
5. See Böhm-Bawerk, op. cit., Part II, pp. 273 ff.; Schumpeter,
Nationalökonomie (Leipzig, 1908), p. 108.
6. Wieser, Der natürliche Wert, p. 46.
7. Ibid., p. 52.
8. Böhm-Bawerk, op cit., Part II, pp. 214 f.
9. See Helfferich, Das Geld, 6th ed. (Leipzig, 1923), pp. 301 f.
10. Thus Schumpeter, op. cit., p. 109.
11. See Böhm -Bawerk, op. cit., Part II, p. 217.

Wesen und Hauptinhalt der theoretischen

12. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine geschichtlichen Veränderungen," Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft,
Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung 13 (1904): 45.
13. Thus even as late as Menger, Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre (Vienna, 1871), p. 259 n; and also Knies,
Geld und Kredit (Berlin, 1885), vol. 1, p. 323.
14. See Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1907), p. 130.
15. But, as a general rule, objects of art, jewelry and oth er things made of precious metal should not be regarded as
constituting part of the stock of metal which performs the function of commodity money. They are goods of the first
order, in relation to which the bullion or coined metal must be regarded as goods of superior orders.
16. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine geschichtlichen Veränderungen," p. 46.
17. More than two hundred years ago, John Law, far ahead of his time and with an insight amounting to genius, had
seized upon this truth: "Il est raisonna ble de penser que l'argent s'échangeait sur le pied de ce qu'il était évalué pour
les usages, comme métal, et q'on le donnait comme monnaie dans les échanges à raison de sa valeur. Le nouvel
usage de la monnaie, auquel l'argent fut appliqué, dut ajouter à sa valeur, parce que, comme monnaie, obviait aux
désavantages et aux inconvénients de l'échange; et conséquemment les demandes d'argent venant à s'augmenter, il
reçut une valeur additionnelle, égale à l'accroissement de la demande occasionnée par son usage comme monnaie.
Et cette valeur additionnelle n'est pas plus imaginaire que la valeur que l'argent avait dans les échanges comme
métal, parce que telle ou telle valeur dérivait de son application à tels ou tels usages, et quelle était plus grande ou
moindre, suivant les demandes d'argent comme métal, en proportion de sa quantité. Le valeur additionnelle que
l'argent reçut de son usage comme monnaie provient de ses qualités, qui le rendaient propre a cet usage; et cette
valeur fut en raison de la demande additionnelle occasionnée par son usage comme monnaie. Si l'une et l'autre de
ces valeurs sont imaginaires, alors toutes les valeurs le sont; car aucune chose n'a de valeur que par l'usage auquel
on l'applique, et à raison des demandes qu'on en fait, proporti onellement à sa quantité" (Considerations sur le
numéraire et le commerce, ed. Daire, Économistes financiers du XVIIIe siécle, 2nd. ed. [Paris, 1851]), pp. 447 f. See
further Walras, Théorie de la monnaie (Lausanne, 1886), p. 40; Knies, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 324. Objective theories of
value are unable to comprehend this fundamental principle of the theory of the value of money. This is best shown by
the lack of comprehension with which Marx confronts the arguments of Law cited above (see Marx, Das Kapital, 7th
ed. (Hamburg, 1914) vol. 1, p. 56, n. 46; trans. E. and C. Paul into English).
18. See Heyn, Irrtümer auf dem Gebiete des Geldwesens (Berlin, 1900), p. 3; Simmel, op. cit., pp. 116 ff.
19. Jevons, Money and the Mechanism of Exchange, 13th ed. (London, 1902), pp. 49 f.
Part II, Chapter 8
20. See pp. 121 -22 above. Also Böhm-Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins, Part II, p. 274; Wieser, Der natürliche Wert,
p. 46. (Eng. trans. The Theory of Natural Value.)
21. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik. 132:513 ff.
22. See Knies, Geld und Kredit (Berlin, 1885), vol. 1, p. 324.
23. Thus Locke, Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and Raising the Value of
Money, 2d ed. (London, 1696), p. 31.
24. See Subercaseaux, Essai sur la nature du papier monnaie (Paris, 1909), pp. 17 f.
25. See Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1907), pp. 115 f.; but, above all, Wieser, "Der Geldwert
und seine Veränderungen," p. 513.
26. See Schmoller, Grundriss der allgemeinen Volkswirtschaftslehre (Leipzig, 1902), vol. 2, p. 110.
27. See Zwiedineck, "Kritisches und Positives zur Preislehre," Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, Vol. 65,
pp. 200 ff.
28. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," p. 513.
29. See Senior, Three Lectures on the Value of Money (London, 1840; 1931), pp. 1 ff.; Three Lectures on the Cost of
Obtaining Money (London, 1830; 1931), pp. 1 ff.
30. See Davanzati, Lezioni delle monete, 1588 (in Scrittori classici italiani di economia politica, Parte Antica (Milan,
1804), vol. 2, p. 32. Locke and, above all, Montesquieu (De l'Ësprit des lois, edition Touquet [Paris, 1821], vol. 2, pp.
458 f.) share this view. See Willis, "The History and Present Application of the Quantity Theory," Journal of Political
Economy 4 (1896): 419 ff.

31. See Zuckerkandl, Zur Theorie des Preises (Leipzig, 1889), p. 124.
32. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," p. 514.
33. See Carver, "The Value of the Money Unit," Quarterly Journal of Economics 11 (1897): 429 f.
34. See Kinley, Money (New York, 1909), pp. 123 ff.
35. See Walras, Théorie de la Monnaie (Lausanne, 1886), pp. 25 ff.
36. See Kemmerer, Money and Credit Instruments in Their Relation to General Prices (New York, 1907), pp. 11 ff.
37. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," pp. 514 ff.
38. [See p. 146 n. H.E.B.]
39. See Wicksell, Geldzins und Güterpreise (Jena, 1898), pp. iv ff, 16 ff.
40. Ibid., p. 35.
41. See Helfferich, Das Geld, 6th ed. (Leipzig, 1923), p. 577.
42. Ibid., p. 578.
43. Dr. B. M. Anderson, pp. 100 -110 of his excellent work The Value of Money (New York, 1917), has objected to the
theory set forth above that instead of a logical analysis it provides merely a temporal regressus. Nevertheless, all the
acute objections that he manages to bring forward are directed only against the argument that finds a historical
component in the exchange ratios subsisting between commodities, an argument with which I also [see pp. 133 f .
above] am in definite disagreement. But Dr. Anderson recognizes the logical foundation of my theory when he
declares, "I shall maintain that value from some source other than the monetary employment is an essential
precondition of the monetary employment" (p. 126).
44. See Menger, Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre (Vienna, 1923), pp. 304 ff. [In the German edition of this
book, the above paragraph was followed by an explanation that German writers, following Menger, usually refer to
"the question of the nature and extent of the influence upon the exchange ratios between money and commodities
exerted by variations in those determinants of prices that lie on the monetary side" as the problem of the innere
objektive Tauschwert of money, and to "those concerned with variations in the objective exchange value of money
throughout time and space in general" as the problem of its äussere objektive Tauschwert. Since this distinction has
not been usual in English terminology, it has been omitted from the present version; and, in what follows, wherever
"the objective exchange value of money" is referred to, it is the innere exchange value that is meant unless the
contrary is explicitly stated. H.E.B.]
45. See Wieser, Über den Ursprung und die Hauptgesetze des wirtschaftlichen Wertes, op. cit., pp. iii.
46. See Laughlin, The Principles of Money (London, 1903), pp. 513 f.
47. Ibid., pp. 530 f.
48. Ibid., pp. 531 ff.
49. See Zuckerkandl, op. cit., pp. 123 ff.
50. See Mill, Principles of Political Economy (London, 1867), p. 299.
51. Cf. Marshall, before the Indian Currency Committee, "Report" (London, 1898—99; Q. 11759), in Official Papers
(London, 1926), p. 267.
52. See Menger, op. cit., pp. 325 ff.; also Helfferich, op. cit., pp. 500 ff.
53. See Appendix B.
54. Examination of the relationship of this supposition to the doctrine of the "purely metallic currency" as expounded
by the Currency School would necessitate a discussion of the criticism that has been leveled at it by the Banking
School; but certain remarks in the third part of the present work on fiduciary media and the clearing system will fill the
gap left above.

55. It is remarkable that even investigators who otherwise take their stand upon the subjective theory of value have
been able to fall into this error. So, for example, Fisher and Brown, The Purchasing Power of Money (New York,
1911), pp. 8 ff.
56. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," pp. 515 ff.
57. See Hume, Essays, ed. Frowde (London), pp. 294 ff.; Mill, op. cit., pp. 298 ff.; Cairnes, Essays in Political
Economy, Theoretical and Applied (London, 1873), pp. 57 ff.; Spiethoff, "Die Quantitätstheorie insbesondere in ihrer
Verwertbarkeit als Haussetheorie," Festgaben für Adolf Wagner (Leipzig, 1905), pp. 250 ff.
58. Hume, op. cit., p. 307
59. Mill, op. cit., p. 299.
60. See Conant, "What Determines the Value of Money?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 18 (1904): 559 ff.
61. See Fisher and Brown, op. cit., pp. 28 ff., 157 ff.
62. See Fullarton, On the Regulation of Currencies, 2d ed. (London, 1845), pp. 69 ff., 138 f.; Wagner, Die Geld- und
Kredittheorie der Peelschen Bankakte (Vienna, 1862), pp. 97 ff.
63. Elsewhere, explicitly as well. See Fullarton, op. cit., pp. 57 f.; Wagner, op. cit., p. 70.
64. See also Knies, Geld und Kredit (Berlin, 1876), vol. 2, 1st half, pp. 284 ff.
65. See Fullarton, op. cit., p. 71.
66. See Diehl, Sozialwissenschaftliche Erläuterungen zu David Ricardos Grundsätzen der Volkswirtschaft und
Besteuerung, 3d ed. (Leipzig, 1922), Part 2, p. 230.
67. See Spiethoff, op. cit., pp. 263 ff.; Kemmerer, op. cit., pp. 67 ff.; Mill, op. cit., pp, 316 ff.
68. See pp. 336 ff. below.
69. See White, Money and Banking Illustrated by American History (Boston, 1895), pp. 166 ff.
70. See Wagner, Theoretische Sozi alökonomik (Leipzig, 1909), vol. 2, p, 245.
71. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine geschichtlichen Veränderungen," pp. 57 ff.; "Der Geldwert und seine
Veränderungen," pp. 527 ff.; "Theorie der gesellschaftlichen Wirtschaft," in Grundriss der Sozialökonomik (Tübingen,
1914), Part I pp. 327 ff.
72. See also my article "Die allgemeine Teuerung im Lichte der theoretischen Nationalalökonomie, Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaft 37: 563 ff.
73. Menger, Beiträge zur Währungsfrage in Österreich-Ungarn (Jena, 1892), pp. 53 ff.
74. For example, the letter postage rates of the member countries of the International Postal Union.
75. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 3d Series, vol. 47, pp. 86-93.
76. See pp. 148 ff. above.
Part II, Chapter 9
77. See pp. 97 above.
78. See Senior, Three Lectures on the Cost of Obtaining Money, pp. 1 ff.
79. See Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik 132: 531 f.
Part II, Chapter 10

80. The theory put forward above, which comes from Ricardo, is advocated with particular forcefulness nowadays by
Cassel, who uses the name purchasing-power parity for the static exchange ratio. See Cassel, Money and Foreign
Exchange After 1914 (London, 1922), p. 181 f.
81. See Senior, Three Lectures on the Transmission of the Precious Metals from Country to Country and the
Mercantile Theory of Wealth (London, 1828), pp. 5 ff.
82. See Ricardo, "Principles of Political Economy and Taxation," in Works, ed. McCulloch, 2d ed. (London, 1852), pp.
213 ff.; Hertzka, Das Wesen des Geldes (Leipzig, 1887), pp. 42 ff.; Kinley, Money (New York, 1909), pp. 78 ff.;
Wieser, "Der Geldwert und seine Veränderungen," Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik 132: 530 ff.
83. Transitory displacements are possible, if foreign money is acquired in the speculative anticipation of its
appreciating.
Part II, Chapter 11
84. [Following Menger, we should call the first of these two problems the problem of the measurability of the äussere
objective exchange value of money, the second that of the measurability of its innere objective exchange value. See
also p. 146 n. H.E.B.]
85. See Menger, Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre, 2d ed. (Vienna, 1923), pp. 298 ff.
86. On Falkner's method, see Laughlin, The Principles of Money (London, 1903), pp. 213—21; Kinley, Money (New
York, 1909), pp. 253 ff.
87. See Wieser, "Uber die Messung der Veränderungen des Geldwerts," Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik 132
(Leipzig, 1910): 544 ff. Joseph Lowe seems to have made a similar proposal as early as 1822; on this, see Walsh,
The Measurement of General Exchange Value (New York, 1901), p. 84.
88. See Weiss, Die moderne Tendenz in der Lehre vom Geldwert, Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und
Verwaltung, vol. 19, p. 546.
89. See also pp. 243 ff. below.
Part II, Chapter 12
90. See Dernburg, Pandekten, 6th ed. (Berlin, 1900), vol. 1, p. 84. On the fact that one of the chief characteristics of
a fiction is the explicit consciousness of its fictitiousness, see also Vaihinger, Die Philosophie des Als ob, 6th ed.
(Leipzig, 1920), p. 173; English trans., The Philosophy of "As If" (London: Kegan Paul, 1924).
91. L. 80, Dig. de solutionibus et liberationibus 46, 3. Pomponius libro quarto ad Quintum Mucium. See further
Seidler, "Die Schwankungen des Geldwertes und die juristische Lehre von dem Inhalt der Geldschulden," Jahrbücher
für Nationalökonomie und Statistik (1894), 3d series, vol. 7, pp. 685 ff.; Endemann, Studien in der romanischekanonistischen Wirtschafts- und Rechtslehre bis gegen Ende des 17 Jahrhunderts (Berlin, 1874), vol. 2, p. 173.
92. In a review of the first edition (Die Neue Zeit, 30th year, vol. 2, p. 1024-1027), Hilferding criticized the above
arguments as "merely funny." Perhaps it is demanding too much to expect this detached sense of humor to be
shared by those classes of the German nation who have suffered in consequence of the depreciation of the mark.
Yet only a year or two ago even these do not appear to have understood the problem any better. Fisher (Heari ngs
Before the Committee on Banking and Currency of the House of Representatives, 67th Cong., 4th sess., on H.R.
1788 [Washington, D.C., 1923], pp. 5 ff., 25 ff.) gives typical illustrations. It was certainly an evil fate for Germany that
its monetary and economic policy in recent years should have been in the hands of men like Hilferding and
Havenstein, who were not qualified even for dealing with the depreciation of the mark in relation to gold.
93. See Knies, Geld und Kredit, (Berlin, 1876), vol. 2, Part I, pp. 105 ff.; Fisher, The Rate of Interest (New York,
1907), pp. 77 ff., 257 ff., 327 ff., 356 ff.
94. See Clark, Essentials of Economic Theory (New York, 1907), pp. 541 ff.
95. See Walsh, The Measurement of General Exchange Value (New York, 1901), pp. 80 ff.; Zi&zbreve;ek, Die
statistischen Mittelwerte (Leipzig, 1908), pp. 183 ff.
96. See Mügel, Geldentwertung und Gesetzgebung (Berlin, 1923), p. 24.
97. [It should be remembered that all this was written in 1924. H.E.B.]
98. At Vienna in March 1892 at the sessions of the Currency Inquiry Commission, which was appointed in
preparation for the regulation of the Austrian currency, Carl Menger remarked: "I should like to add that not only

legislators, but all of us in our everyday life, are in the habit of disregarding the fluctuations in the purchasing power
of money. Even such distinguished bankers as yourselves, gentlemen, draw up your balance sheet at the end of the
year without inquiring whether by any chance the sum of money representing the share capital has gained or lost in
purchasing power." These remarks of Menger's were not understood by the director of the Bodenkreditanstalt,
Theodor von Taussig, the most outstanding of all Austrian bankers. He replied: "A balance sheet is a balancing of the
property or assets of a company or individual against its liabilities, both expressed in terms of the accepted measure
of value or monetary standard, that is, for Austria in gulden. Now I cannot see how, when we are thus expressing
property and indebtedness in terms of the standard (which we have assumed to be homogeneous), we are to take
account of variations in the standard of measurement instead of taking account of variations in the object to be
measured, as is customary." Taussig completely failed to see that the point at issue concerned the estimation of the
value of goods and the amount of depreciation to be written off, and not the balancing of monetary claims and
monetary obligations, or that a profit and loss account, if it is not to be hopelessly inexact, must take account of
variations in the value of money. Menger had no occasion to raise this point in his reply, since he was rather
concerned to show that his remarks were not to be interpreted, as Taussig was inclined to interpret them, as an
accusation of dishonest practice on the part of the bank directors. Menger added: "What I said was merely that all of
us, not only the directors of the banks (I said even such men as are at the head of the banks), make the mistake of
not taking account in everyday life of changes in the value of money" (Stenographische Protokolle über die vom 8.
bis 17. März 1892 abgehaltenen Sitzungen der nach Wien einberufenen Währungs-Enquete-Kommission [Vienna,
2892], pp. 221, 257, 270).
99. See my book, Nation, Staat und Wirtschaft (Vienna, 1919), pp. 129 ff. A whole series of writings dealing with
these questions has since appeared in Germany and Austria.
100. Cf. further pp. 440 ff. below.
101. See Ricardo, Letters to Malthus, ed. Bonar (Oxford, 1887), p. 10.
102. See Hume, Essays, ed. Frowde (London), p. 294 ff.
103. Auspitz and Lieben, Untersuchungen über die Theorie des Preises (Leipzig, 1889), p. 65.
Part II, Chapter 13
104. [The author uses the term Geldwertpolitik in the technical sense defined in the above section. I have reserved
the term monetary policy for this special meaning. Currency policy is the term I have used to translate
Währungspolitik. H.E.B.]
105. Similar interests, say those of the printers, lithographers, and the like, may play a part in the production of paper
money also. Perhaps such motives had something to do with Benjamin Franklin's recommendation of an increase of
paper money in his first political writing, which was published (anonymously) in Philadelphia in 1729: "A Modest
Inquiry int o the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency" (in The Works of Benjamin Franklin, ed. Sparks [Chicago,
1882], vol. 2, pp. 253 -77). Shortly before —as he relates in his autobiography (ibid., vol. 1, p. 73)—he had printed the
notes for New Jersey, and when his pamphlet led to the decision to issue more notes in Pennsylvania, despite the
opposition of the "rich men," he got the order to print the notes. He remarks on this in his autobiography: "A very
profitable job, and a great help to me. This was another advantage gained by me being able to write" (ibid., p. 92).
* [Printed Liberty Fund edition mistakenly reads "Native"—Econlib Ed.]
106. On the naive inflationary proposals that have been made in recent years by the motor-car manufacturer Henry
Ford, the famous inventor Edison, and the American senator Ladd, see Yves Guyot, Les problèmes de la déflation
(Paris, 1923), pp. 281 f.
107. This had been urged as early as 1740 by William Douglass in his anonymous writing A Discourse Concerning
the Currencies in the British Plantations in America (Boston, 1740). See also Fisher, The Rate of Interest, p. 356.
108. See Hertzka, Währung und Handel (Vienna, 1876), p. 42.
109. See Bentham, Defense of Usury, 2d ed. (London, 1790), pp. 102 ff.
110. See Wright and Harlow, The Gemini Letters (London, 1844), pp. 51 ff.
111. See Hofmann, "Die Devalvierung des österreichischen Papiergeldes im Jahre 1811," Schriften des Vereins für
Sozialpolitik 165, Part I.
112. [It should be remembered that the German edition from which the present version is translated was published in
1926. See, however, the discussion of British policy, pp. 23 -26 above. H.E.B.]
113. [See p. 146 n above.]

114. Cp. pp. 251 and 262-63 above.
115. Esp. Pigou, The Economics of Welfare (London, 1921), pp. 665 ff.
Part II, Chapter 14
116. On this, see my book, Die Gemeinwirtschaft, 2d ed., (Jena, 1922), pp. 211 ff.
117. See my book, Nation, Staat und Wirtschaft (Vienna, 1919), pp. 108 ff.
118. Cassel rightly says: "A perfectly clear understanding of the monetary problem, brought about by the world war,
can never be attained until officialdom's interpretation of affairs has been disproved point by point, and full light
thrown on all the delusions with which the authorities attempted as long as possible to obsess the public mind"
(Cassel, Money and Foreign Exchange After 1914 [London, 1922], pp. 7 ff.). See Gregory's criticism of the most
important etatistic arguments in his Foreign Exchange Before, During and After the War (London, 1921), esp. pp. 65
ff.
119. A leader of the Hungarian Soviet republic said to the author in the spring of 1919: "The paper money issued by
the Soviet republic ought really to have the highest exchange rate next to the Russian money, for, through the
socialization of the private property of all Hungarians, the Hungarian state has become next to Russia the richest
state in the world, and consequently the most deserving of credit."
Part III, Chapter 15
1. See Bagehot, Lombard Street (London, 1906), p. 21.
2. Knies, Geld und Kredit, (Berlin, 1876), vol. 2, Part II, p. 242. See further, Weber, Depositen- und
Spekulationsbanken (Leipzig, 1902), pp. 106 f.; Sayous, Les banques de depôt, les banques de crédit et les sociétés
financières, 2d ed. (Paris, 1907), pp. 219 ff.; Jaffé, Das englische Bankwesen, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1910), p. 203.
3. See Macleod, The Elements of Banking (London, 1904), p. 153.
4. See Fullarton, On the Regulation of Currencies, 2d ed. (London, 1845), p. 39; Mill, Principles of Political Economy
(London, 1867), p. 314; Jaffé, op. cit., p. 175.
5. See Jaffé, op. cit., p. 153.
6. This is the "surplus profit" (Übergewinn) of the business of banking, referred to by Hermann (op. cit., pp. 500 f.).
7. As, for example, even Wicksell does (Geldzins und Güterpreise [Jena, 1898], p. 57).
8. See Torrens, The Principles and Practical Operation of Sir Robert Peel's Act of 1844 Explained and Defended, 2d
ed. (London, 1857), pp. 16 ff.
9. Ibid., p. 18.
10. Since the appearance of the first edition of the present work numerous books have been published that still do
not recognize the problem of circulation credit. Among the works that have grasped the nature of this problem the
following should be mentioned: Schumpeter, Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Leipzig, 1912), pp. 219 ff.;
Schlesinger, Theorie der Geld- und Kreditwirtschaft (Munich and Leipzig, 1914), pp. 133 ff.; Hahn,
Volkswirtschaftliche Theorie des Bankkredits (Tübingen, 1920), pp. 52 ff.
11. Thus Lexis, Allegemeine Volkswirtschaftslehre (Berlin, 1910) (Hinnenberg, Die Kultur der Gegenwart, section II,
vol. 10, Part 1), p. 122; Lexis, Geld und Preise (Riesser-Festgabe, Berlin, 1913), pp. 83 f. Similarly, with regard to the
clearinghouse business, Schumacher, Weltwirtschaftliche Studien (Leipzig, 1911), pp. 53 f. and the writings there
referred to.
Part III, Chapter 16
12. See Lotz, Geschichte und Kritik des deutschen Bankgesetzes vom 14. März 1875 (Leipzig, 1888), pp. 72 f.
13. See for example on the Swiss currency reserve fund established by article 8 of the Currency Act of January 31,
1860, Altherr, Eine Betrachtung über neue Wege der schweizerischen Münzpolitik (Bern, 1908), pp. 61 ff.
14. See Knies, Geld und Kredit, (Berlin, 1876), vol. 2, Part I, pp. 268 ff.

15. See l. 21, sec. 1 D. de liberatione legata 34, 3. Terentius Clemens libro XII ad legem Juliam et Papiam.
16. See l. 1 D. der compensationibus 16, 2. Modestinus libro sexto pandectarum.
17. See Thornton, An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain (London, 1802), pp. 39
ff.
18. See Baird, The One Pound Note, Its History, Place and Power in Scotland, and Its Adaptability for England, 2d
ed. (Edinburgh, 1901), pp. 9 ff.; Graham, The One Pound Note in the History of Banking in Great Britain, 2d ed.
(Edinburgh, 1911), pp. 195 ff.; Nicholson, A Treatise on Money and Essays on Present Monetary Problems
(Edinburgh, 1888), pp. 177 ff.; Jevons, Investigations in Currency and Finance (London, 1909), pp. 275 ff.
19. See Lindsay, A Gold Standard Without a Gold Coinage in England and India (Edinburgh, 1879), pp. 12 ff. I have
not been able to obtain access to a second pamphlet by the same author which appeared anonymously in 1892
under the title Ricardo's Exchange Remedy.
20. See Probyn, Indian Coinage and Currency (London, 1897), pp. 1 ff.
21. See Report of the Indian Currency Committee 1898 (in Stability of International Exchange, Report on the
Introduction of the Gold-Exchange Standard into China and Other Silver-using Countries submitted to the Secretary
of State, October 1, 1903, by the Commission on International Exchange [Washington, D.C., 1903], Appendix G), pp.
(315).; Heyn, Die indische Währungsreform, (Berlin, 1903), pp. 54 ff.; Bothe, Die indische Währungsreform seit 1893
(Stuttgart, 1906), pp. 199 ff.
22. On the fate of the Indian currency in the period of inflation during the Great War, see Spalding, Eastern
Exchange, Currency and Finance, 3d ed. (London, 1920), pp. 31 ff.
23. See Conant, "The Gold Exchange Standard in the Light of Experience," The Economic Journal 19 (1909): 200.
24. In the pamphlet published in 1816, "Proposals for an Economical and Secure Currency with Observations on the
Profits of the Bank of England," in Works, ed. McCulloch, 2d ed. (London, 1852), pp. 404 ff.
25. See Patterson, Der Krieg der Banken, trans. from the English by Holtzendorff (Berlin, 1867), pp. 17 ff.; Wolf,
Verstaatlichung der Silberproduktion und andere Vorschläge zur Währungsfrage (Zurich, 1892), pp. 54 ff.; Wolf,
"Eine international Banknote," in Zietscrift für Sozialwissenschaft (1908), vol 11, pp. 44 ff.
26. These words, written in 1911, need no addition today.
27. See De Greef, "La monnaie, le crédit et le change dans le commerce international," Revue economique
internationale 4 (1911): 58 ff.
Part III, Chapter 17
28. See Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Cannan's ed. (London, 1930), vol. 2, pp. 28, 78.
29. See Ricardo, "The High Price of Bullion a Proof of the Depredation of Bank Notes," in Works, ed. McCulloch, 2d
ed. (London, 1852), pp. 263 ff.; "Proposals for an Economical and Secure Currency" in ibid., pp. 397 ff.; see pp. 32425 above and 467 -68 below.
30. On the question of the dependence of economic fluctuations on credit policy, see pp. 445 f. below.
31. See Jevons, Investigations in Currency and Finance, pp. 8, 151 ff.; Palgrave, Bank Rate and the Money Market in
England, France, Germany, Holland and Belgium 1844-1900 (London, 1903), pp. 106 ff.; 138; J. Laughlin, The
Principles of Money (London, 1903), pp. 409 ff.
32. See Spiethoff, "Die Quantitätstheorie insbesondere in ihrer Verwertbarkeit als Haussetheorie," Festgaben für
Adolf Wagner (Leipzig, 1905), pp. 263 f.
33. See Helfferich, Studien über Geld- und Bankwesen (Berlin, 1900), pp. 151 f.; Schumacher, Weltwirtschaftliche
Studien (Leipzig, 1911), pp. 5 ff.
34. See White, An Elastic Currency (New York, 1893), p. 4.
35. See pp. 173 ff. above.
36. See Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency Principle (London, 1844), pp. 60 ff.; 122 f.; Fullarton, On the Regulation
of Currencies, 2d ed. (London, 1845), pp, 82 ff.; Wilson, Capital, Currency and Banking (London, 1847), pp. 67 ff.;

Mill, Principles of Political Economy (London, 1867), pp. 395 ff.; Wagner, Geld- und Kredittheorie der Peelschen
Bankakte (Vienna, 1862), pp. 135 ff. On Mill's lack of consistency in h
t is question, see Wicksell, Geldzins und
Güterpreise (Jena, 1898), pp. 78 f.
37. See Laughlin, The Principles of Money (London, 1903), p. 412.
38. See Wicksell, op. cit., p. v.
39. See Fullarton, op. cit., p. 64.
40. See Schumacher, op. cit., pp. 122 f.
41. See Prion, Das deutsche Wechseldiskontgeschäft (Leipzig, 1907), pp. 120 ff., 291 ff.
42. Part of the rediscounting done at the Reichsbank by the private banks shortly before the critical days of
settlement is done not so much because the banks are short of capital but because they desire to pass on nearly
matured bills to be called in by the Reichsbank, which is able to perform this task more cheaply than they are, thanks
to its extensive network of branches. See ibid., pp. 138 ff.
Part III, Chapter 18
43. See Ricardo, "Proposals," in Works, ed. McCulloch, 2d ed. (London, 1852), p. 406; Walras, Études d'économie
politique appliquée (Lausanne, 1898), pp. 365 f.
44. See for example, Tellkampf, Die Prinzipien des Geld- und Bankwesens (Berlin, 1867), pp. 181 ff.; Erfordernis
voller Metalldeckung der Banknoten (Berlin, 1873), pp. 23 ff.; Geyer, Theorie und Praxis des Zettelbankwesens, 2d
ed. (Munich, 1874), p. 227.
45. See Hepburn, History of Coinage and Currency in the United States (New York, 1903), p. 418.
46. See Dunbar, Chapters on the Theory and History of Banking, 2d ed. (New York, 1907), P. 99.
47. See Kiga, Das Bankwesen Japans, Leipziger Inaug. Diss., p. 9.
48. See Oppenheim, Die Natur des Geldes (Mainz, 1855), pp. 241 f.
49. This example assumes the circumstances that existed before 1914.
50. See pp. 296 ff. But the fact is often ignored that this "principle of the banking adequate cover" is valid not only for
banks but similarly for all other undertakings. See, for example, Schulze-Gaevernitz, "Die deutsche Kreditbank,"
Grundriss der Sozialökonomik, Part V, section 2, pp. 240 ff.
51. See Wagner, System der Zettelbankpolitik (Freiburg, 1873), pp. 240 ff.—The "golden rule" found its classical
expression with regard to the business of credit banks in the famous "Note expédiée du Havre le 29 Mai 1810, à la
Banque de France, par ordre de S. M. l'Empereur, et par l'entremise de M. le comte Mollien, ministre du Trésor" (I
quote from the reprint in Wolowski, La Question des Banques [Paris, 1864], pp. 83-87): "Il faut qu'une banque se
maintienne en état de se liquider à tout moment, d'abord, vis-à-vis des porteurs de ses billets, par la réalisation de
son portefeuille, et, apres les porteurs de ses billets, viv-à-vis de ses actionnaires, par la distribution à faire entre eux
de la portion du capital fourni par chacun d'eux. Pour ne jamais finir, une banque doit etre toujours prête à finir" (p.
87). All the same, Mollien had no doubt on the point that a bank that does not issue its notes otherwise "qu'en
échange de bonnes et valable lettres de change, à deux et trois mois de terme au plus" can only call in its notes from
circulation "dans un espace de trois mois" (ibid., p. 84).
52. In the United States, before the reorganization of the banking system under the Federal Reserve Act, the lack of
a central bank in times of crises was made up for by ad hoc organizations of the banks that were members of the
clearinghouses.
53. See above, pp. 346 f.
54. See Nicholson, A Treatise on Money and Essays on Present Monetary Problems (Edinburgh, 1888), pp. 67 f.
55. See Kalkmann, "Holland's Geldwesen im 29. Jahrhundert," in Schmoller's Jahrbuch, vol. 25, pp. 2249 ff.; Witten,
"Die Devisenpolitik der Nationalbank von Belgien," in ibid., vol. 42, pp. 625 ff.
Part III, Chapter 19

56. The fact that I have followed the terminology and method of attack of Böhm-Bawerk's theory of interest
throughout this chapter does not imply that I am an adherent of that theory or am able to regard it as a satisfactory
solution of the problem. But the present work does not afford scope for the exposition of my own views on the
problem of interest; that must be reserved for a special study, which I hope will appear in the not too distant future. In
such circumstances I have had no al ternative but to develop my argument on the basis of Böhm -Bawerk's theory.
Böhm-Bawerk's great achievement is the foundation of the work of all those who until now have dealt with the
problem of interest since his time, and may well be the foundation of the work of those who will do so in the future.
He was the first to clear the way that leads to understanding of the problem; he was the first to make it possible
systematically to relate the problem of interest to that of the value of money.
57. See Hume, Essays, ed. Frowde (London), pp. 303 ff.; Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Cannan's ed. (London,
1930), vol. 2, pp. 243 ff.; see also J. S. Mill, Principles of Political Economy (London, 1867), pp. 296 f.
58. See, for example, Georg Schmidt, Kredit und Zins (Leipzig, 1910), pp. 38 ff.
59. The transaction is conducted by the bank selling part of its consols "for money" and buying them back
immediately "on account." The on -account price is higher, because it contains a large part of the interest that is
almost due; the margin between the two prices represents the compensation that the bank pays for the loan. The
cost that this entails is made up for by the fact that the bank now gets a larger proportion of the lending business.
See Jaffé, Das englische Bankwesen, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1910), p. 250.
60. See, for example, Arendt, Geld—Bank—Börse (Berlin, 1907), p. 19.
61. See Gilbart, The History, Principles and Practice of Banking, rev. ed. (London, 1904), vol. 1, p. 98.
62. See Wicksell, Geldzins und Güterpreise (Jena, 1898), p. 74. Indeed, even the writers of that period do frequently
deal with the problem of a change in the rate of interest; see, for example, Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency
Principle (London, 1844), p. 224.
63. See Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency Principle (London, 1844), pp. 121 ff.; Fullarton, On the Regulation of
Currencies, 2d ed. (London, 1845), pp. 82 ff.; Wilson, Capital, Currency and Banking (London, 1847), pp. 67 ff.
Wagner follows the train of thought of these writers in his Die Geld- und Kredittheorie der Peelschen Bankakte, pp.
135 ff.
64. See Torrens, The Principles and Practical Operation of Sir Robert Peel's Act of 1844 Explained and Defended, 2d
ed. (London, 1857), pp. 57 ff.; Overstone, Tracts and Other Publications on Metallic and Paper Currency (London,
1858), passim.
65. See Wicksell, op. cit., pp. 1 ff.
66. See Fisher, The Rate of Interest (New York, 1907), pp. 94 f.
67. See Böhm -Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins, p. 622.
68. See Fisher and Brown, The Purchasing Power of Money (New York, 1911), pp. 58 ff.
69. See, for instance, the most recent literature on the German banking reform; for example, the above -cited work by
Schmidt (see p. 379 n. 3). An historical study would have to examine the extent to which Law, Cie szkowski,
Proudhon, Macleod, and others, are to be regarded as inventors and adherents of this doctrine.
70. See Wicksell, op. cit., pp. v ff.
71. See ibid., pp. v ff., III; also "The Influence of the Rate of Interest on Prices," Economic Journal 18 (1907): 213 ff.
72. See Wicksell, "The Influence of the Rate of Interest," p. 215.
73. See Wicksell, Geldzins und Güterpreise, pp. 104 f.
74. See Walras, Études d'économie politique appliquée (Lausanne, 1898), pp. 345 f.
75. See Böhm -Bawerk, op. cit., pp. 611 ff.
76. Ibid., pp. 151 ff.
77. The fact that the two movements occur in opposite directions, so that they cancel one another, had been
emphasized by Mill (Principles, pp. 391 ff.) in order to show that the increase in the rate of interest caused by i nflation
would be counteracted by the circumstance that the additional quantity of notes, if issued by the banks (and the
additional quantity of gold so far as it was used productively), have a reducing effect on the bank rate of interest.

78. See p. 259 -60 above.
Part III, Chapter 20
79. [Some of the problems that have arisen since are referred to on pp. 23-31. H.E.B.]
80. [See editor's Introduction, pp. 21 -22, above. H.E.B.]
81. See Torrens, The Principles and Practical Operation of Sir Robert Peel's Act of 1844 Explained and Defended, 2d
ed. (London, 1857), pp. 8 ff.
82. See Tooke, An Inquiry into the Currency Principle (London, 1844), pp. 23 ff.
83. See Wagner, "Banknote," in Rentzsch, Handwörterbuch der Volkswirtschaftslehre (Leipzig, 1866), p. 91.
84. See Wagner, "Kredit," ibid., p. 201.
85. See Schumacher's criticism of this contradiction, Weltwirtschaftliche Studien (Leipzig, 1911), pp. 62 ff.
86. See Cannon, Clearinghouses: Their History, Methods and Administration (New York, 1900), pp. 79 ff.
87. The Federal Reserve Act has since provided the United States with a basis for issuing notes in order to allay a
panic.
88. See Sartorious von Waltershausen, Das volkswirtschaftliche System der Kapitalanlage im Auslande (Berlin,
1907), pp. 126 ff.
89. [See pp. 21-22 above. H.E.B.]
90. See Rosendorff, "Die Goldprämienpolitik der Banque de France und ihre deutschen Lobredner," Jahrbücher für
Nationalökonomie und Statistik 21 (1901): 632 ff.; Dunbar, Chapters on the Theory and History of Banking, 2d ed.
(New York, 1907), pp. 147 ff.
91. See Kaufmann, Das französische Bankwesen (Tübingen, 1911), pp. 35 ff.
92. On this, see Rosendorff, op. cit., pp. 640 ff., and passages cited in the essay "Die neue Richtung in der
Goldpolitik der Bank von Frankreich," Bank-Archiv. 7 (1907): (72) ff., taken from the statements of account of the
Bank of France, in which the raising of the discount rate is spoken of as the "seul moyen connu de défendre
l'encaisse."
93. See Landesberger, Währungssystem und Relation (Vienna, 1891), p. 104.
94. Ibid., p. 105, and Über die Goldprämienpolitik der Zettelbanken (Vienna, 1892), p. 28.
95. Even at the time when the thaler was still unlimited legal tender and so occupied position analogous to that of the
French five-franc piece, the German Reichsbank never followed a gold-premium policy on the French pattern,
although it was often advised to do so. This is probably to be ascribed not so much to the circumstance that the
number of thalers was relatively small as to the influence of Bamberger's ideas throughout the Reich. An open break
with the principles of the banking and currency reform of the period after 1870-71 was, in view of the prevailing
opinion, out of the question.
96. See Koch, Der Londoner Goldverkehr (Stuttgart, 1905), p. 708.
97. Ibid., pp. 81 f.
98. See Clare, A Money Market Primer and Key to the Exchanges, 2d ed. (London, 1893), p. 22.
99. Rosendorff ("Die Goldprämienpolitik der Banque de France," p. 636) would appear to be mistaken in thinking it
possible to detect a difference of principle between the procedure of the Bank of England and the Reichsbank in
paying out gold and the gold -premium policy of the Bank of France. He bases his view on the argument that,
whereas the latter refuses altogether to pay out French gold coins and is thus theoretically able to raise the amount
of the premium indefinitely, the Bank of England and the Reichsbank, which in contrast to the Bank of France always
redeem their notes at their full value in current gold coin and have never attempted to refuse to pay out gold, are able
to raise the selling price of bullion only by the amount of the cost of minting and an allowance for wear and tear.
Rosendorff, in arguing from the statement that the Bank of France is "theoretically" able to raise the amount of the
gold-premium indefinitely, flatly contradicts what he says in the rest of his book. In fact it does not do it, quite apart
from the consideration that the law forbids it also. But if it did it, then it would completely alter the character of the

French monetary system. It could not be expected that the French government and the Chambers would sanction the
transaction to a credit-money standard which would be involved in such a procedure.
100. Thus, in the Compte rendu for 1898 (pp. 12 f.): "Si nous nous efforçons de conserver de grandes disponibilités
métalliques et de les ménager le mieux possible, nous ne devons pas non plus perdre de vue les intérêts du
commerce et lui refuser les moyens de payement qu'il réclame pour les besoins les plus légitimes, c'est-à-dire pour
l'approvisionnement du marché français."
101. See my article Das Problem gesetzlicher Aufnahme der Barzahlungen in Osterreich-Ungarn, p. 1017. If the
Austro-Hungarian Bank were to follow the example of the Bank of France in this or some other way it would achieve
an exactly opposite result to that achieved by the French institution. Like that of the Bank of France, its action would
restrict not merely the efflux but also the influx of gold. In France, the creditor na tion, this means something very
different from what it means in Austria, the debtor nation. In France, restriction of the importation of capital (which
would only exceptionally occur) is unobjectionable; in Austria, the country that is dependent on constant importation
of capital from abroad, it would have quite a different effect. The fact that there was a possibility of difficulties in
subsequently repatriating the capital would mean that a greater gap than otherwise would have to occur between the
Viennese and the foreign rates of interest before capital would be sent to Austria, and this would mean that the rate
of interest in Austria would always be higher. The fact, on the other hand, that the export of Austrian short -term
capital would also not be pro fitable except when there was a greater gap than otherwise between the home and
foreign rates would not counteract the above disadvantage, because the question of capital exportation from AustriaHungary to western countries very seldom arises.
102. See Koch, op. cit., p. 79; Die Reichsbank 1876-1900 (Berlin, 190l), p. 146.
103. See Obst, Banken und Bankpolitik (Leipzig, 1909), pp. 90 f.; Hertz, "Die Diskont und Devisenpolitik der
österreichisch-ungarischen Bank," Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung 12 (1903): 496.
104. See Koch, op. cit., pp. 79 ff.; Hertz, op. cit., p. 521; Spitzmüller, "Valutareform und Währungsgesetzgebung," in
Oesterreichischen Staatswörterbuch, 2d ed., vol. 2, p. 300.
105. See also Proebst, Die Grundlagen unseres Depositen- und Scheckwesens (Jena, 1908), pp. 1 ff.
106. It is only in very recent years that views on this point in dominant circles have begun slowly to change.
107. [The reader will remember that this was written in 1924. H.E.B.]
108. See Keynes, A Tract on Monetary Reform (London, 1923), pp. 163 ff.
109. See Kant, Werke, vol. 5, Zum ewigen Frieden (Insel-Ausgabe), pp. 661 f.
110. See Horn, Bankfreiheit (Stuttgart, 1867), pp. 376 f.
111. [It should be remembered that this was written in 1924. H.E.B.]
112. See pp. 166 f. above. Fisher particularly refers to this independence (Stabilizing the Dollar [New York, 1920], p.
90) and Anderson similarly affirms it, although in his book The Value of Money he has most severely criticized
Fisher's version of the quantity theory of money. See Anderson, The Fallacy of "The Stabilized Dollar" (New York,
1920), pp. 6 f.
113. See pp. 215 ff. and 232 ff. above.
Part IV, Chapter 21
1. See Mises, Human Action (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1949), pp. 204-6.
2. See pp. 139 -44 above.
3. About this problem, see Human Action, pp. 463-68.
4. See A. B. Lerner, The Economics of Control (New York, 1944), pp. 307-8.
5. See B. Ruml, "Taxes for Revenue Are Obsolete," American Affairs 8 (1946): 35-36.
6. See chap. 11 above; Human Action, pp. 55-57, 347-49.

7. Part 3 of this book is entirely devoted to the exposition of the trade -cycle theory, the doctrine that is called the
monetary- or circulation -credit theory, sometimes also the Austrian theory. See also Huma n Action, pp. 535-83, 78794.
8. See Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (London, 1936), p. 264.
Part IV, Chapter 22
9. For the reasons that led to the establishment of such foreign-exchange equalization accounts, see Human Acti on,
pp. 458 -59.
Part IV, Chapter 23
10. About the fundamental error of this point of view, see chap. 19 above.
11. For the only exception to this rule, see next paragraph below.
12. See pp. 493-94 below.
Appendix A
13. See Endemann, Studien in der romanisch-kanonistischen Wirtschafts- und Rechtslehre bis gegen Ende des 17.
Jahrhunderts (Berlin, 1874-1883), vol. 2, p. 199.
14. See Voigt, "Die staatliche Theorie des Geldes," Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft 62: 318 f.
15. Bendixen, Währungspolitik und Geldtheorie im Lichte des Weltkriegs (Munich and Leipzig, 1916), p. 37 (2d ed.,
1919, p. 44).
16. Dühring, Cursus der National-und Sozialökonomie, 3d ed. (Leipzig, 1892), pp. 42 ff., 401.
17. See also Palyi, Der Streit um die staatliche Th eorie des Geldes (Munich and Leipzig, 1922), pp. 88 ff.
18. Knapp, Staatliche Theorie des Geldes, 3d ed. (1921), pp. 445 ff.
19. To imagine that the state theory is a juristic theory, is to be ignorant of the purpose that a juristic theory of money
has to fulfill. Anybody who holds this opinion should refer to any work on the law of contract and note what questions
are there dealt with in the chapter on money.
20. Knapp, op. cit., pp. 206, 214.
21. Lexis, "Papiergeld," in Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften, 3d. ed., vol. 6, pp. 987 ff.
22. Schumpeter, "Das Sozialprodukt und die Rechenpfennige," Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik 44:
635, 647 ff.
23. Ibid., pp. 665 f.
24. See above, pp. 168 ff.
25. Knapp, op. cit., p. 281; "Die Beziehungen Oesterreichs zur staatlichen Theorie des Geldes," Zeitschrift für
Volkswirtschaft, &c. 17: 440.
26. Knapp, Staatliche Theorie, pp. 6 f.
27. "Alle unsere Nationalökonomen sind Metallisten," Knapp, "Über die Theorien des Geldwesens," Jahrbuch für
Gesetzgebung, &c. 33: 432.
28. Knapp, "Die Währungsfrage vom Staat aus betrachtet," Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, &c. 41: 1528.
29. Knapp, "Über die Theorien des Geldwesens," p. 430.
30. Ibid., p. 432.

31. See also pp. 332 f. above.
32. From the pamphlet of Ricardo's referred to above it may suffice to quote the following passage only: "A well regulated paper currency is so great an improvement in commerce that I should greatly regret if prejudice should
induce us to return to a system of less utility. The introduction of the precious metals for the purposes of money may
with truth be considered as one of the most important steps toward the improvement of commerce and the arts of
civilized life; but it is no less true, that, with the advancement of knowledge and science, we discover that it would be
another improvement to banish them again from the employment to which, during a less enlightened period, they had
been so advantageously applied" (Works, 2d ed. [London, 1852], p. 404). Thus the real appearance of Ricardo's
"metallistic indignation."
33. Wieser, Über die Messung der Veränderungen des Geldwerts, p. 542.
34. Wieser, "Theorie der gesellschaftlichen Wirtschaft," Grundriss der Sozialökonomik (Tübingen, 1924), p. 316.
35. See the passages quoted on pp. 125 f. above.
36. See Knapp, Staatliche Theorie, 1st ed., pp. 5, 7.
37. See Zuckerkandl, Zur Theorie des Preises mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der geschichtlichen Entwicklung der
Lehre (Leipzig, 1899), pp. 98, 115 f.
38. See Hermann, Staatswirtschaftliche Untersuchungen, 2d ed. (Munich, 1870), p. 444; Knies, Das Geld, 2d ed.
(Berlin, 1885), p. 324.
39. Knapp, Staatliche Theorie, p. 5.
40. Bendixen, op. cit., p. 134.
41. See Wieser, "Theorie der gesellschaftlichen Wirtschaft," p. 317.
42. [Of which the present work is a translation. H.E.B.]
43. Philippovich, Grundriss (Tübingen, 1916), p. 275.
44. Ibid.
45. See esp. Knapp, Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vol. 132, pp. 560 ff.
46. Knapp, Geldtheorie, staatliche in H. d. S., 3d ed.
47. Philippovich, op. cit.
48. Ibid., pp. 272 ff.
49. Lansburgh, Kriegskostendeckung (Berlin, 1915), pp. 52 ff.
50. Bortkiewicz, Frage der Reform, A. s. P. G., vol. 6, p. 98,
51. See pp. 379 ff. above.
Appendix B
52. See p. 155 above.
53. See also pp. 146 n and 247 n above.

