The
CounterRevolution
of

Science
STUDIES ON THE

ABUSE OF REASON

By

F.

A.

Hayek

The Free Press of Glencoe
Collier-Macmillan Limited, London

Copyright 1955 by The Free Press, a Corporation
Printed in the United States of America
All rights in this book are reserved.
may be used or reproduced in any

No part of this book

manner whatsoever
without written permission except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.

FIRST FREE PRESS PAPERBACK EDITION 1964

For information, address:
The Free Press of Glencoe
A Division of The Macmillan Company

The

Crowell-Collier Publishing

60 Fifth Avenue,

Company

New York, N. Y.,

10011

Collier-Macmillan Canada, Ltd., Toronto, Ontario

DESIGNED BY SIDNEY SOLOMON
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 52-8 157

B

REFACE

THE STUDIES united in this volume, although in the first instance
published separately in the course of a number of years, form part
of a single comprehensive plan. For this republication the exposition
has been slightly revised and a few gaps have been filled in, but the
is unchanged. Their arrangement is now systematic, in

main argument

the order in which the argument develops, rather than the accidental
one of their first appearance. The book thus begins with a theoretical

discussion of the general issues and proceeds to an examination of
the historical role played by the ideas in question. This is not mere
pedantry or a device for avoiding unnecessary repetition but, it seems
to

essential in order to

show

the true significance of the particular
development'. But I am quite aware that as a result the opening
sections of the book are relatively more difficult than the rest, and

me,

that

it

might have been more

in the forefront. I

still

put the more concrete matter
most readers who are interested
the present arrangement more con-

politic to

believe that

in this kind of subject will find

venient.

But any reader who has

may do

well to read

little

taste for abstract discussion

the second part which has given the title
he will then find the general discussion of the

first

to this volume. I hope
same problems in the first study more interesting.
These two major sections of the volume were first published in
parts in Economica for 1942-1944 and for 1941 respectively. The
third study, written more recently as a lecture appeared first in
Measure for June 1951 but was prepared from notes collected at the
same time as those for the first two essays. I have to thank the editors
of both these journals and the London School of Economics and
Political Science and the Henry Regnery Company of Chicago as their
respective publishers for permission to reprint what first appeared

under

their auspices.

F. A.

HAYEK

c

ONTENTS
PAGE

PREFACE

5

PART ONE. SCIENTISM AND THE STUDY OF SOCIETY
I.

The

Influence of the Natural Sciences
Sciences

on

11

the Social

III.

The Problem and the Method of the Natural Sciences
The Subjective Character of the Data of the Social

IV.

The

II.

25

Sciences
Individualist

and "Compositive" Method of the

Social Sciences

The Objectivism of the Scientistic Approach
VI. The Collectivism of the Scientistic Approach
VII. The Historicism of the Scientistic Approach
VHI. "Purposive" Social Formations
IX. "Conscious" Direction and the Growth of Reason
X. Engineers and Planners
V.

PART TWO. THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE
I.

The Source

III.

IV.

V.
VI.

36
44
53

64
80
87
94
103

of the Scientistic Hubris: L'Ecole Poly-

technique
II.

13
17

The "Accoucheur

d'Idees": Henri de Saint-Simon

Social Physics: Saint-Simon and Comte
The Religion of the Engineers: Enjantin

Simonians
Saint-Simonian Influence
Sociology: Comte and His Successors

and

105
111
129

the Saint-

143
156
168

PART THREE. COMTE AND HEGEL

189

NOTES

207

INDEX

251

T

IHHE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

Part

One

SCIENTISM

AND THE STUDY
OF SOCIETY
Systems which have universally owed their origin to
the lucubrations of those who were acquainted with one
art, but ignorant of the other; who therefore explained
to themselves the phenomena, in that which was strange
to them, by those in that which was familiar; and with
whom, upon that account, the analogy, which in other
writers gives occasion to a few ingenious similitudes, became the great hinge on which every thing turned.

ADAM SMITH

(Essay on the History of Astronomy).

I
THE INFLUENCE OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES
ON THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
IN THE COURSE of

its slow development in the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries the study of economic and social phenomena was
guided in the choice of its methods in the main by the nature of the

to face. 1 It gradually developed a technique appropriate to these problems without much reflection on the character of
the methods or on their relation to that of other disciplines of knowl-

problems

it

had

edge. Students of political economy could describe it alternatively as
a branch of science or of moral or social philosophy without the least

qualms whether their subject was scientific or philosophical. The
term "science" had not yet assumed the special narrow meaning it
has today, 2 nor was there any distinction made which singled out the
physical or natural sciences and attributed to them a special dignity.
Those who devoted themselves to those fields indeed readily chose
the designation of philosophy when they were concerned with the
more general aspects of their problems, 8 and occasionally we even
find "natural philosophy" contrasted with "moral science."

During the
its

first

appearance.

half of the nineteenth century a new attitude made
science came more and more to be confined

The term

to the physical and biological disciplines which at the same time
began to claim for themselves a special rigorousness and certainty
which distinguished them from all others. Their success was such that

they soon

came

to exercise an extraordinary fascination

on those

working in other fields, who rapidly began to imitate their teaching
and vocabulary. Thus the tyranny commenced which the methods
and technique of the Sciences 4 in the narrow sense of the term have
ever since exercised over the other subjects. These became increas13

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

14

ingly concerned to vindicate their equal status by showing that their
methods were the same as those of their brilliantly successful sisters
rather than by adapting their methods more and more to their own
particular problems. And, although in the hundred and twenty years
or so, during which this ambition to imitate Science in its methods
rather than its spirit has now dominated social studies, it has con*
tributed scarcely anything to our understanding of social phenomena,
not only does it continue to confuse and discredit the work of the
social disciplines, but

are
if

still

demands

for further attempts in this direction

presented to us as the latest revolutionary innovations which,

adopted, will secure rapid undreamed of progress.
Let it be said at once, however, that those who were loudest in

these demands were rarely themselves men who had noticeably enriched our knowledge of the Sciences. From Francis Bacon, the Lord
Chancellor, who will forever remain the prototype of the "dema-

gogue of science," as he has justly been called, to Auguste Comte
and the "physicalists" of our own day, the claims for the exclusive
virtues of the specific methods employed by the natural sciences were
mostly advanced by men whose right to speak on behalf of the scientists were not above suspicion, and who indeed in many cases had

shown

in the Sciences themselves as

much

bigoted prejudice as in

their attitude to other subjects. Just as Francis
5

and

Bacon opposed Co-

Comte

taught that any too minute investigation of the phenomena by such instruments as the microscope
was harmful and should be suppressed by the spiritual power of the

pernican Astronomy,

as

positive society, because it tended to upset the laws of positive science, so this dogmatic attitude has so often misled men of this type
in their own field that there should have been little reason to pay too

much

deference to their views about problems still more distant from
from which they derived their inspiration.

the fields

There
in

is

yet another qualification which the reader ought to keep
the following discussion. The methods which sci-

mind throughout

entists or

men

fascinated

by the natural sciences have so often

tried

upon the social sciences were not always necessarily those
which the scientists in fact followed in their own field, but rather

to force

those which they believed that they employed. This
the

same

thing.

The

scientist reflecting

is

not necessarily

and theorizing about

his pro-

THE INFLUENCE OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES
cedure
of the
last

is

15

not always a reliable guide. The views about the character
of Science have undergone various fashions during the

method

few generations, while we must assume that the methods actually

followed have remained essentially the same. But since it was what
scientists believed that they did, and even the views which they had
held some time before, which have influenced the social sciences, the
following comments on the methods of the natural sciences also do

not necessarily claim to be a true account of what the scientists in
fact do, but an account of the views on the nature of scientific method

which were dominant in recent times.

The

history of this influence, the channels through which it operated, and die direction in which it affected social developments,

which the
an
introduction.
Before
we trace
present essay
the historical course of this influence and its effects, we shall here
attempt to describe its general characteristics and the nature of the
problems to which the unwarranted and unfortunate extensions
of the habits of thought of the physical and biological sciences have
given rise. There are certain typical elements of this attitude which
we shall meet again and again and whose prima facie plausibility
makes it necessary to examine them with some care. While in the
will

occupy us throughout the
is

series of historical studies to

designed to serve as

particular historical instances it is not always possible to show how
these characteristic views are connected with or derived from the

habits of thought of the scientists, this

is

easier in a systematic

survey.
It need scarcely be emphasized that nothing we shall have to say
aimed against the methods of Science in their proper sphere or is
intended to throw the slightest doubt on their value. But to preclude
any misunderstanding on this point we shall, wherever we are conis

cerned, not with the general spirit of disinterested inquiry but with
slavish imitation of the method and language of Science, speak of
"scientism" or the "scientistic" prejudice. Although these terms are

not completely unknown in English, 6 (hey are actually borrowed
from the French, where in recent years they have come to be
generally used in very much the same sense in which they will be
used here.7 It should be noted that, in the sense in which we shall
use these terms, they describe, of course, an attitude which

is

16

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

decidedly unscientific in the true sense of the word, since it involves
a mechanical and uncritical application of habits of thought to fields
different from those in which they have been formed. The scientistic
as distinguished from the scientific view is not an unprejudiced
but a very prejudiced approach which, before it has considered its
subject, claims to

vestigating

it.

know what

is

the

most appropriate way of

in-

8

It would be convenient if a similar term were available to describe
the characteristic mental attitude of the engineer which,
although
in many respects closely related to scientism, is
yet distinct from it

but which

No

single

we

shall

we

intend to consider here in connection with the latter.
of equal expressiveness suggests itself, however, and

word

have to be content to describe this second element so
and 20th century thought as the "engineering
type of mind."
characteristic of 19th

II
THE PROBLEM AND THE METHOD
OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES
BEFORE WE CAN understand the reasons for the trespasses of scientism we must try to understand the struggle which Science itself had
to fight against concepts and ideas which were as injurious to its
progress as the scientistic prejudice now threatens to become to the
progress of the social studies. Although we live now in an atmos-

phere where the concepts and habits of thoughts of everyday life
are to a high degree influenced by the ways of thinking of Science, we
must not forget that the Sciences had in their beginning to fight their
way in a world where most concepts had been formed from our
relations to other

natural that the

men and in interpreting their actions. It is only
momentum gained in that struggle should carry

Science beyond the

mark and

create a situation where the danger

is

now

the opposite one of the predominance of scientism impeding
the progress of the understanding of society. 9 But even if the pendulum

has

now

swung

definitely

we

in the opposite direction, only confusion

which have created
and which justify it in its proper sphere.
There were three main obstacles to the advance of modern
Science against which it has struggled ever since its birth during the
Renaissance; and much of the history of its progress could be
could result

if

failed to recognize the factors

this attitude

its gradual overcoming of these difficulties. The
although not the most important, was that for various reasons
scholars had grown used to devoting most of their effort to analyzing

written in terms of
first,

other people's opinions: this was so not only because in the disciplines
most developed at that time, like theology and law, this was the actual
object, but

even more because, during the decline of Science in the
17

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

18

Middle Ages, there seemed to be no better way of arriving

at the

truth about nature than to study the work of the great men of the
past. More important was the second fact, the belief that the "ideas"

of the things possessed some transcendental reality, and that by
analyzing ideas we could learn something or everything about the
attributes of the real things. The third and perhaps most important
fact

was

that

man had begun everywhere to interpret the events in
own image, as animated by a mind like

the external world after his

own, and that the natural sciences therefore met everywhere
explanations by analogy with the working of the human mind, with
"anthropomorphic" or "animistic" theories which searched for a purposive design and were satisfied if they had found in it the proof of
his

the operation of a designing mind.
Against all this the persistent effort of
to get

down

modern Science has been
what men thought

to "objective facts," to cease studying

about nature or regarding the given concepts as true images of the
above all, to discard all theories which pretended to
explain phenomena by imputing to them a directing mind like our

real world, and,

own. Instead,

its

main task became

to revise

and reconstruct the

concepts formed from ordinary experience on the basis of a systematic testing of the phenomena, so as to be better able to recognize
the particular as an instance of a general rule. In the course of this
process not only the provisional classification which the commonly
used concepts provided, but also the first distinctions between the
different perceptions which our senses convey to us, had to give way
to a completely new and different way in which we learned to order
or classify the events of the external world.

The tendency

to

abandon

all

anthropomorphic elements in the
its most extreme development

discussion of the external world has in

even led to the belief that the demand for "explanation" itself is
based on an anthropomorphic interpretation of events and that all
Science ought to aim at is a complete description of nature. 10 There
is,

as

we

tion that

shall see, that

element of truth in the

we can understand and

explain

first

human

part of this contenaction in a way we

cannot with physical phenomena, and that consequently the term
"explain" tends to remain charged with a meaning not applicable
to physical

phenomena.

11

The

actions of other

men were

probably

THE PROBLEM AND THE METHOD OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES

19

first experiences which made man ask the question "why?" and
took him a long time to learn, and he has not yet fully learned, 12
that with events other than human actions he could not expect the

the
it

same kind of "explanation"

human

as

he can hope to obtain

behavior.

in the case of

'

That the ordinary concepts of the kind of things that surround us
do not provide an adequate classification which enables us to state
general rules about their behavior in different circumstances, and
that in order to do so we have to replace them by a different classification of events is familiar. It may, however, still sound surprising
that what is true of these provisional abstractions should also be
true of the very sense qualities which most of us are inclined to regard
as the ultimate reality. But although it is less familiar that science
breaks up and replaces the system of classification which our sense
qualities represent, yet this is precisely what Science does. It begins
with the realization that things which appear to us the same do not
always behave in the same manner, and that things which appear
sometimes prove in all other respects to behave in
it proceeds from this experience to substitute
for the classification of events which our senses provide a new one
which groups together not what appears alike but what proves to
behave in the same manner in similar circumstances.
While the naive mind tends to assume that external events which
our senses register in the same or in a different manner must be
similar or different in more respects than merely in the way in which
different to us

the

same way; and

they affect our senses, the systematic testing of Science shows that
this is frequently not true. It constantly shows that the "facts" are
different from "appearances." We learn to regard as alike or unlike
not simply what by itself looks, feels, smells, etc., alike or unlike,
but what regularly appears in the same spatial and temporal context.
And we learn that the same constellation of simultaneous sense per-

may prove to proceed from different "facts," or that different
combinations of sense qualities may stand for the same "fact."

ceptions

A

white powder with a certain weight and "feel" and without taste
or smell may prove to be any one of a number of different things
according as it appears in different circumstances or after different

combinations of other phenomena, or as

it

produces different results

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

20

in certain ways with other things. The systematic
in different circumstances will thus often show
of
behavior
testing
that things which to our senses appear different behave in the same

combined

if

or at least a very similar manner. We may not only find that, e.g.,
a blue thing which we see in a certain light or after eating a certain

same thing as the green thing which we see in different
circumstances, or that what appears to have an elliptical shape may
prove to be identical with what at a different angle appears to be
drug

is

the

we may

also find that phenomena which appear as
and water are "really" the same "thing."
This process of re-classifying "objects" which our senses have
already classified in one way, of substituting for the "secondary"
qualities in which our senses arrange external stimuli a new classification based on consciously established relations between classes of
events is, perhaps, the most characteristic aspect of the procedure
of the natural sciences. The whole history of modern Science proves
to be a process of progressive emancipation from our innate classification of the external stimuli till in the end they completely disappear
circular,

but

different as ice

so that "physical science has now reached a stage of development
that renders it impossible to express observable occurrences in lan-

guage appropriate to what is perceived by our senses. The only
18
i.e., the discipline
appropriate language is that of mathematics,"
developed to describe complexes of relationships between elements

which have no

new elements
still

While at first the
which the physical world was "analyzed" were

attributes except these relations.

into

endowed with

"qualities,"

i.e.,

conceived as in principle visible

or touchable, neither electrons nor waves, neither the atomic structure nor electromagnetic fields can be adequately represented

by

mechanical models.

The new world which man

thus creates in his mind, and which

consists entirely of entities which cannot be perceived by our senses,
is yet in a definite way related to the world of our senses. It serves,

indeed, to explain the world of our senses. The world of Science
might in fact be described as no more than a set of rules which

enables us to trace the connections between different complexes
of sense perceptions. But the point is that the attempts to establish

such uniform rules which the perceptible phenomena obey have been

THE PROBLEM AND THE METHOD OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES

21

unsuccessful so long as we accepted as natural units, given entities,
such constant complexes of sense qualities as we can simultaneously
perceive. In their place new entities, "constructs," are created which
can be defined only in terms of sense perceptions obtained of the

"same" thing in different circumstances and at different times a
procedure which implies the postulate that the thing has in some
sense remained the same although all its perceptible attributes may
have changed.
In other words, although the theories of physical science at the
stage which has now been reached can no longer be stated in terms
of sense qualities, their significance is due to the fact that we possess rules, a "key,"

which enables us

to translate

them

into state-

ments about perceptible phenomena. One might compare the relation
of modern physical theory to the world of our senses to that between
the different ways in which one might "know" a dead language
existing only in inscriptions in peculiar characters. The combinations
of different characters of which these inscriptions are composed and

which are the only form

in

which the language occurs correspond

to

the different combinations of sense qualities. As we come to know
the language we gradually learn that different combinations of these

may mean

the same thing and that in different contexts
of
the same group
characters may mean different things. 14 As we
learn to recognize these new entities we penetrate into a new world

characters

where the

units are different

from the

letters

and obey

in their rela-

tions definite laws not recognizable in the sequence of the individual
letters.
can describe the laws of these new units, the laws of

We

grammar, and

all

that can be expressed

by combining the words

according to these laws, without ever referring to the individual
letters or the principle on which they are combined to make up the
signs for whole words. It would be possible, e.g., to know all about
the grammar of Chinese or Greek and the meaning of all the

words

knowing Chinese or Greek characsounds of the Chinese or Greek words). Yet if Chinese
or Greek occurred only written in their respective characters, all
in these languages without

ters (or the

this

knowledge would be of as

little

use as knowledge of the laws of

nature in terms of abstract entities or constructs without knowledge

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

22

of the rules by which these can be translated into statements about

phenomena

As
need

perceptible by our senses.

in our description of the structure of the language there is no
for a description of the way in which the different units are

made up from

various combinations of letters (or sounds), so in our

theoretical description of nature the different sense qualities through
which we perceive nature disappear. They are no longer treated as

come to be regarded merely as ways in which
we spontaneously perceive or classify external stimuli. 15
The problem how man has come to classify external stimuli in the
particular way which we know as sense qualities does not concern

part of the object and

us here. 16 There are only two connected points which must be briefly
mentioned now and to which we must return later. One is that, once
we have learnt that the things in the external world show uniformity
in their behavior towards each other only if we group them in a way
different from that in which they appear to our senses, the question
why they appear to us in that particular way, and especially why
17
they appear in the same
way to different people becomes a genuine
problem calling for an answer. The second is that the fact that different men do perceive different things in a similar manner which does
not correspond to any known relation between these things in the
external world, must be regarded as a significant datum of experience
which must be the starting point in any discussion of human behavior.

We

are not interested here in the methods of the Sciences for their

own sake and we cannot follow up this topic further. The
which we mainly wanted to stress was that what men know or

point
think

about the external world or about themselves, their concepts and even
the subjective qualities of their sense perceptions are to Science never
ultimate reality, data to be accepted. Its concern is not what men
think about the world and

how

they consequently behave, but what

they ought to think. The concepts which men actually employ,
the way in which they see nature, is to the scientist necessarily a
provisional affair and his task is to change this picture, to change
the concepts in use so as to be able to make more definite and more
certain our statements about the

There

is

new

one consequence of

all

classes of events.
this

which

in

view of what

THE PROBLEM AND THE METHOD OF THE NATURAL SCIENCES

23

follows requires a few more words. It is the special significance
which numerical statements and quantitative measurements have in
the natural sciences. There is a widespread impression that the main
importance of this quantitative nature of most natural sciences is their
greater precision. This

is not so. It is not merely adding precision to
a procedure which would be possible also without the mathematical
form of expression it is of the essence of this process of breaking

up our immediate sense data and of substituting for a description in
terms of sense qualities one in terms of elements which possess no
attributes but these relations to each other. It is a necessary part
of the general effort of getting away from the picture of nature
which man has now, of substituting for the classification of events

which our senses provide another based on the relations established
by systematic testing and experimenting.
To return to our more general conclusion: the world in which
Science is interested is not that of our given concepts or even sensations. Its aim is to produce a new organization of all our experience
of the external world, and in doing so it has not only to remodel our
concepts but also to get away from the sense qualities and to replace
them by a different classification of events. The picture which man
has actually formed of the world and which guides him well enough
in his daily life, his perceptions and concepts, are for Science not an
object of study but an imperfect instrument to be improved. Nor is
Science as such interested in the relation of

man

to things, in the

way

existing view of the world leads him to act. It is
rather such a relation, or better a continuous process of changing
these relationships. When the scientist stresses that he studies objective facts he means that he tries to study things independently of
what men think or do about them. The views people hold about
the external world is to him always a stage to be overcome.

in

which man's

But what are the consequences of the fact that people perceive the
world and each other through sensations and concepts which are
organized in a mental structure common to all of them? What
can we say about the whole network of activities in which men
are guided by the kind of knowledge they have and a great part of
which at any time is common to most of them? While Science is all
the time busy revising the picture of the external world that man

24

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

possesses, and while to it this picture is always provisional, the fact
that man has a definite picture, and that the picture of all beings

whom we
is

to

some

recognize as thinking men and whom we can understand
extent alike, is no less a reality of great consequence and

the cause of certain events. Until Science

work and not

had

literally

completed

its

the slightest unexplained residue in man's intellectual processes, the facts of our mind must remain not only data
to be explained but also data on which the explanation of human
left

action guided by those mental phenomena must be based. Here a
set of problems arises with which the scientist does not directly
deal. Nor is it obvious that the particular methods to which he has

new

become used would be appropriate
is

here not

but

for these problems.

The question

how

far man's picture of the external world fits the facts,
his actions, determined by the views and concepts he

how by
man

builds up another world of which the individual
becomes a part. And by "the views and concepts people hold" we
do not mean merely their knowledge of external nature. We mean all
they know and believe about themselves, about other people, and
about the external world, in short everything which determines their
possesses,

actions, including science itself.
This is the field to which the social studies or the

address themselves.

"moral sciences"

Ill
THE SUBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE DATA
OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
BEFORE WE PROCEED
study of society

it

will

to consider the

be expedient

effect of

scientism

on

the

brief ly""to survey the peculiar'

object and^the methods of the social studies. Vhey deal, not with
tBe relations between things, but with the relations between men

and llhmgs drtheT relations between man andjnan^They are con"
berned with man's actions, and their aim is to explain theTunintended
or

undesigi^nK^^
Not

life

of

all

the disciplines of knowledge which are concerned with the
in groups, however, raise problems which differ in any

men

important respect from those of the natural sciences. The spread of
contagious diseases is evidently a problem closely connected with
the life of man in society and yet its study has none of the special
characteristics of the social sciences in the

narrower sense of the

term. Similarly the study of heredity, or the study of nutrition, or the
investigation of changes in the number or age composition of populations,

And

do not differ significantly from similar studies of animals. 18
same applies to certain branches of anthropology, or eth-

(he

nology, in so far as they are concerned with physical attributes of
men. There are, in other words, natural sciences of man which do
not necessarily raise problems with which we cannot cope with the

methods of the natural

sciences.

Wherever we are concerned with
human body there is no obthem "mechanically" as caused by

unconscious reflexes or processes in the
stacle to treating

and

investigating

They take place without the
concerned and without his having power to
modify them; and the conditions under which they are produced can
objectively observable external events.

knowledge of the

man

25

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

26

be established by external observation without recourse to the assumption that the person observed classifies the external stimuli in
any way differently from that in which they can be defined in purely
physical terms.
The social sciences in the narrower sense, i.e., those which used to
be described as the moral sciences, 19 are concerned with man's conscious or reflected action, actions where a person can be said to
choose between various courses open to him, and here the situation
is essentially different. The external stimulus which may be said to
cause or occasion such actions can of course also be defined in purely

physical terms. But

ing

human

action,

if

we

tried to

we would

do so for the purposes of explain-

confine ourselves to less than

we know

about the situation. It is not because we have found two things to
behave alike in relation to other things, but because they appear alike
to us, that we expect them to appear alike to other people. We know
that people will react in the same way to external stimuli which according to all objective tests are different, and perhaps also that they
will react in a completely different manner to a physically identical
stimulus

man

We know,

circumstances or at a dif-

in other words, that in his conscious decisions

a way which we know solely from
take
subjective experience of this kind of classification.
for granted that other men treat various things as alike or unlike

our
it

affects their bodies in different

if it

ferent point.

classifies external stimuli in

We

own

just as

we

do, although

no

objective test,

no knowledge of the

rela-

tions of these things to other parts of the external world justifies this.
Our procedure is based on the experience that other people as a rule

(though not always

e.g.,

their sense impressions as

But we not only know

not

we

if

they are colorblind or

mad)

classify

do.

would be impossible to explain or
making use of this knowledge.
do
behave
in
the
same
manner
towards things, not because
People
these things are identical in a physical sense, but because they have
learnt to classify them as belonging to the same group, because they
can put them to the same use or expect from them what to the people
concerned is an equivalent effect. In fact, most of the objects of
social or human action are not "objective facts" in the special narrow
sense in which this term is used by the Sciences and contrasted to
understand

human

this. It

action without

THE SUBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

27

"opinions," and they cannot at all be defined in physical terms. So
human actions are concerned the things are what the acting
people think they are.
far as

This

is

best

shown by an example

for which

we can choose almost

any object of human action. Take the concept of a "tool" or "instrument," or of any particular tool such as a hammer or a barometer.
It is easily seen that these concepts cannot be interpreted to refer to
to things irrespective of what people think
about them. Careful logical analysis of these concepts will show that

"objective facts,"

i.c.,

they all express relationships between several (at least three) terms,
of which one is the acting or thinking person, the other some desired
or imagined effect, and the third a thing in the ordinary sense. If the

reader will attempt a definition he will soon find that he cannot give
one without using some terms such as "suitable for" or "intended
for" or

some other expression

referring to the use for

which

it is

de-

20

And a definition which is to comprise all insigned by somebody.
stances of the class will not contain any reference to its substance, or
shape, or other physical attribute.

An

ordinary

hammer and

a steam-

hammer, or ah aneroid barometer and a mercury barometer, have
nothing in

common

except the purpose

21

for

which men think they

can be used.

must not be objected

that these are merely instances of abstractions to arrive at generic terms just as those used in the physical sciences. The point is that they are abstractions from all the physical
It

attributes of the things in question

and that

their definitions

must run

entirely in terms of mental attitudes of men towards the things. The
significant difference between the two views of the things stands out

we

think e.g. of the problem of the archaeologist trying to
whether
what looks like a stone implement is in truth an
determine
"artifact," made by man, or merely a chance product of nature.
There is no way of deciding this but by trying to understand the
clearly

if

working of the mind of prehistoric man, of attempting to understand

how he would have made such an implement. If we are not more
aware that this is what we actually do in such cases and that we
necessarily rely on our own knowledge of the working of a human
mind,

this is

so mainly because of the impossibility of conceiving of

28

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

an observer who does not possess a human mind and interprets what
he sees in terms of the working of his own mind.
There are no better terms available to describe this difference between the approach of the natural and the social sciences than to call
the former "objective" and the latter "subjective." Yet these terms
are ambiguous and might prove misleading without further explanation. While for the natural scientist the contrast between objective
facts and subjective opinions is a simple one, the distinction cannot
as readily be applied to the object of the social sciences. The reason
for this

is

opinions

that the object, the "facts" of the social sciences are also
not opinions of the student of the social phenomena, of

course, but opinions of those whose actions produce the object of
the social scientist. In one sense his facts are thus as little "subjective" as those of the natural sciences, because they are independent

of the particular observer; what he studies is not determined by his
is in the same manner given to the observa-

fancy or imagination but

by different people. But in another sense in which we distinguish
from opinions, the facts of the social sciences are merely opinions, views held by the people whose actions we study. They differ
from the facts of the physical sciences in being beliefs or opinions
held by particular people, beliefs which as such are our data, irrespective of whether they are true or false, and which, moreover, we
cannot directly observe in the minds of the people but which we can
recognize from what they do and say merely because we have ourtion

facts

selves a

mind

similar to theirs.

In the sense in which

we

here use the contrast between the sub-

jectivist approach of the social sciences and the objectivist approach
of the natural sciences it says little more than what is commonly expressed by saying that the former deal in the first instance with the

of individual minds, or mental phenomena, and not diwith
material
phenomena. They deal with phenomena which
rectly
can be understood only because the object of our study has a mind

phenomena

is so is no less an empirical
the
of
external
world.
It is shown not merely
knowledge
with
the
of
other
communicating
by
people we act on
possibility
this knowledge every time we speak or write; it is confirmed by the

of a structure similar to our own. That this

fact than our

very results of our study of the external world. So long as

it

was

THE SUBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
naively assumed that

men had

different
it

in

all

the sense qualities (or their relations) which
properties of the external world,

common were

could be argued that our knowledge of other minds

than our

29

common knowledge

is

no more

of the external world. But once

we

have learnt that our senses make things appear to us alike or different
which prove to be alike or different in none of their relations between
themselves, but only in the way in which they affect our senses, this
fact that men classify external stimuli in a particular way becomes a

While qualities disappear from our sciworld they must remain part of our
scientific picture of the human mind. In fact the elimination of qualities from our picture of the external world does not mean that these
qualities do not "exist," but that when we study qualities we study
not the physical world but the mind of man.
In some connections, for instance when we distinguish between
the "objective" properties of things which manifest themselves in
their relations to each other, and the properties merely attributed to
them by men, it might be preferable to contrast "objective" with "attributed," instead of using the ambiguous term "subjective." The

significant fact of experience.

entific picture of the external

is, however, only of limited usefulness. The main
expedient to retain the terms "subjective" and "objective" for the contrast with which we are concerned, although they
inevitably carry with them some misleading connotations, are not

word

"attributed"

reasons

why

it is

only that most of the other available terms, such as "mental" and
"material," carry with them an even worse burden of metaphysical

and that at least in economics 22 the term "subjective"
has long been used precisely in the sense in which we use it here.
What is more important is that the term "subjective" stresses another
important fact to which we shall yet have to refer: that the knowledge and beliefs of different people, while possessing that common
structure which makes communication possible, will yet be different
and often conflicting in many respects. If we could assume that all
the knowledge and beliefs of different people were identical, or if we
were concerned with a single mind, it would not matter whether we
described it as an "objective" fact or as a subjective phenomenon.
But the concrete knowledge which guides the action of any group of
people never exists as a consistent and coherent body. It only exists
associations,

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

30

in the dispersed, incomplete, and inconsistent form in which it appears in many individual minds, and this dispersion and imperfection
of all knowledge is one of the basic facts from which the social scistart. What philosophers and logicians often condismiss
as "mere" imperfections of the human mind betemptuously
comes in the social sciences a basic fact of crucial importance. We

ences have to

shall later see

how

the opposite "absolutist" view, as

if

knowledge,

and particularly the concrete knowledge of particular circumstances,
were given "objectively," i.e., as if it were the same for all people, is a
source of constant errors in the social sciences.

The

"tool" or "instrument" which

illustration of the objects of

human

instances

from any other branch of

And

same

we have

before used as an

matched by similar
A "word" or a "sen-

action can be

social study.
23
are of course not objective
tence," a "crime" or a "punishment,"
facts in the sense that they can be defined without referring to our
knowledge of people's conscious intentions with regard to them.

the

is

quite generally true wherever

we have

to explain

human

behavior towards things; these things must then not be defined in terms of what we might find out about them by the objective

methods of

about them.

science, but in terms of

what the person acting thinks

A medicine or a cosmetic, e.g., for the purposes of social

study, are no! what cures an ailment or improves a person's looks,
but what people think will have that effect. Any knowledge which
we may happen to possess about the true nature of the material thing,

but which the people whose action

we want

to explain do not posof
their actions as our
explanation
in
disbelief
the
of
a
will help us to
charm
magic
private
efficacy
understand the behavior of the savage who believes in it. If in investisess, is as little relevant to the

gating our contemporary society the "laws of nature" which we have
to use as a datum because they affect people's actions are approximately the same as those which figure in the works of the natural
scientists, this is for our purposes an accident which must not deceive
us about the different character of these laws in the two fields. What

relevant in the study of society is not whether these laws of nature
are true in any objective sense, but solely whether they are believed
and acted upon by the people. If the current "scientific" knowledge

is

of the society which

we

study included the belief that the soil will

THE SUBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
bear no

fruit

till

31

certain rites or incantations are performed, this
as any law of nature which we

would be quite as important for us

now

believe to be correct.

And

all

the "physical laws of production"

which we meet,

e.g., in economics, are not physical laws in the sense
of the physical sciences but people's beliefs about what they can do.
What is true about the relations of men to things is, of course,

even more true of the relations between men, which for the purposes
of social study cannot be defined in the objective terms of the physical sciences but only in terms of human beliefs. Even such a seemingly purely biological relationship as that between parent and child
is in social study not defined in physical terms and cannot be so defined for their purposes: it makes no difference with regard to people's actions whether their belief that a particular child is their natural offspring is mistaken or not.

All this stands out most clearly in that among the social sciences
whose theory has been most highly developed, economics. And it is
probably no exaggeration to say that every important advance in economic theory during the last hundred years was a further step in the
consistent application of subjectivism. 24 That the objects of economic
activity

to a

cannot be defined in objective terms but only with reference
goes without saying. Neither a "commodity" or

human purpose

an "economic good," nor "food" or "money," can be defined

in

physical terms but only in terms of views people hold about things.
Economic theory has nothing to say about the little round disks of

metal as which an objective or materialist view might try to define
money. It has nothing to say about iron or steel, timber or oil, or

wheat or eggs as such. The history of any particular commodity indeed shows that as human knowledge changes the same material
thing may represent quite different economic categories. Nor could
we distinguish in physical terms whether two men barter or exchange
or whether they are playing some game or performing some religious
ritual. Unless we can understand what the acting people mean by
their actions any attempt to explain them, i.e., to subsume them
under rules which connect similar situations with similar actions, are

bound
it

to

fail.

25

This essentially subjective character of all economic theory, which
has developed much more clearly than most other branches of the

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

32

social sciences, 26 but
social sciences in the

sideration of one of
its

original

form

which I believe
narrower sense,

its

it

has in

is

best

simplest theorems,

common

shown by a

e.g.,

with

all

the

closer con-

the "law of rent." In

was a proposition about changes in the value
27
physical terms, namely land. It stated, in effect,

this

of a thing defined in
that changes in the value of the commodities in the production of
which land was required would cause much greater changes in the

value of land than in the value of the other factors whose co-operation was required. In this form it is an empirical generalization which
tells

us neither

why nor under what

conditions

it

will

be

true.

In

modern economics

its place is taken by two distinct propositions of
which together lead to the same conclusion. One
is part of pure economic theory and asserts that whenever in the production of one commodity different (scarce) factors are required in
proportions which can be varied, and of which one can be used only

different character

for this (or only for comparatively few) purposes while the others
are of a more general usefulness, a change in the value of the product
will affect the value of the former more than that of the latter. The

second proposition is the empirical statement that land is as a rule in
the position of the first kind of factor, i.e. that people know of many
more uses for their labor than they will know for a particular piece
of land. The first of these propositions, like all propositions of pure
economic theory, is a statement about the implications of certain
human attitudes towards things and as such necessarily true irrespective of time and place. The second is an assertion that the conditions
postulated in the first proposition prevail at a given time and with respect to a particular piece of land, because the people dealing with it
hold certain beliefs about its usefulness and the usefulness of other
things required in order to cultivate it. As an empirical generalization

can of course be disproved and frequently will be disproved. If, e.g.,
a piece of land is used to produce some special fruit the cultivation of
which requires a certain rare skill, the effect of a fall in the demand for

it

wages of the men with the special
skill,
may remain practically unaffected.
In such a situation it would be labor to which the "law of rent" applies. But when we ask: "why?" or: "how can I find out whether the
law of rent will apply in any particular case?" no information about

the fruit

may

fall

exclusively

on

the

while the value of the land

THE SUBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

33

the physical attributes of the land, the labor, or the product can give
us the answer. It depends on the subjective factors stated in the theo-

law of rent; and only in so far as we can find out what the
knowledge and beliefs of the people concerned are in the relevant respects shall we be in a position to predict in what manner a change
retical

in the price of the product will affect the prices of the factors. What
is true of the theory of rent is true of the theory of price generally:

has nothing to say about the behavior of the price of iron or wool,
of things of such and such physical properties, but only about things
about which people have certain beliefs and which they want to use
it

in a certain

And our explanation of a particular price phetherefore also never be affected by any additional

manner.

nomenon can

knowledge which we (the observers) acquire about the good concerned, but only by additional knowledge about what the people
dealing with

it

think about

it.

We

cannot here enter into a similar discussion of the more complex phenomena with which economic theory is concerned and where
in recent years progress has been particularly closely connected with

We

can only point to the new problems
the advance of subjectivism.
which these developments make appear more and more central, such

problem of the compatibility of intentions and expectations of
knowledge between them, and the
process by which the relevant knowledge is acquired and expectaas the

different people, of the division of

tions formed. 28

We

are not here concerned, however, with the speof
but with the common character of all
economics,
problems
which
with
the
deal
results of conscious human action.
disciplines

cific

we want to stress are that in all such attempts we
from what men think and mean to do: from the fact that
the individuals which compose society are guided in their actions by
The

must

points which
start

a classification of things or events according to a system of sense
qualities and of concepts which has a common structure and which

we know because we,

too, are

men; and

that the concrete

knowledge

which

Not

different individuals possess will differ in important respects.
only man's i^tion towards external objects but also all the re-

lations

between

men and all the social institutions can be understood
men think about them. Society as we know it

only in terms of what
is, as it were, built up

from the concepts and ideas held by the peo-

34
pie;

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE
and

social

phenomena can be recognized by us and have mean-

ing to us only as they are reflected in the minds of men.
The structure of men's minds, the common principle on which they
classify external events, provide us with the knowledge of the recurrent elements of which different social structures are built

up and

in

alone describe and explain them. 29 While concepts or ideas can, of course, exist only in individual minds, and

terms of which

we can

while, in particular,

it is

can act upon another,

only in individual minds that different ideas
not the whole of the individual minds in

it is

all their complexity, but the individual concepts, the views people
have formed of each other and of the things, which form the true elements of the social structure. If the social structure can remain the
same although different individuals succeed each other at particular
points, this is not because the individuals which succeed each other
are completely identical, but because they succeed each other in particular relations, in particular attitudes they take towards other people and as the objects of particular views held by other people about
them. The individuals are merely the foci in the network of relationships and it is the various attitudes of the individuals towards each
other (or their similar or different attitudes towards physical objects)
which form the recurrent, recognizable and familiar elements of the
structure. If one policeman succeeds another at a particular post, this
does not mean that the new man will in all respects be identical with
his predecessor, but merely that he succeeds him in certain attitudes
towards his fellow man and as the object of certain attitudes of his
fellow men which are relevant to his function as policeman. But this
is sufficient to preserve a constant structural element which can be
separated and studied in isolation.
While we can recognize these elements of human relationships
only because they are known to us from the working of our own
minds, this does not mean that the significance of their combination
in a particular pattern relating different individuals must be immediately obvious to us. It is only by the systematic and patient following

up of the implications of many people holding certain views that we
can understand, and often even only learn to see, the unintended and
often uncomprehended results of the separate and yet interrelated
actions of men in society. That in this effort to reconstruct these dif-

THE SUBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

35

ferent patterns of social relations we must relate the individual's action not to the objective qualities of the persons and things towards
which he acts, but that our data must be man and the physical world
as they appear to the men whose actions we try to explain, follows
fact that only what people know or believe can enter as a

from the

motive into their conscious action.

IV
THE INDIVIDUALIST AND "COMPOSITIVE" METHOD
OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
AT

it becomes necessary briefly to interrupt the main
in
order
to safeguard ourselves against a misconception
argument
which might arise from what has just been said. The stress which we

THIS POINT

have laid on the fact that in the social sciences our data or "facts"
are themselves ideas or concepts must, of course, not be understood
to mean that all the concepts with which we have to deal in the social
sciences are of this character. There would be no room for any scientific work if this were so; and the social sciences no less than the
natural sciences aim at revising the popular concepts which men
have formed about the objects of their study, and at replacing them

by more appropriate ones. The special difficulties of the social sciences, and much confusion about their character, derive precisely
from the fact that in them ideas appear in two capacities, as it were,
as part of their object and as ideas about that object. While in the
natural sciences the contrast between the object of our study and our
explanation of it coincides with the distinction between ideas and objective facts, in the social sciences it is necessary to draw a distinction between those ideas which are constitutive of the phenomena we
want to explain and the ideas which either we ourselves or the very
people whose actions we have to explain may have formed about
these phenomena and which are not the cause of, but theories about,
the social structures.

This special

difficulty of the social sciences is

we have

a

result,

not merely

to distinguish between the views held by
the people which are the object of our study and our views about
them, but also of the fact that the people who are our object them-

of the fact that

36

THE INDIVIDUALIST AND "COMPOSITIVE" METHOD

37

selves not only are motivated by ideas but also form ideas about the
undesigned results of their actions popular theories about the vari-

we share with them and
and improve. The danger of substituting "concepts" (or "theories") for the "facts" is by no means absent
in the social sciences and failure to avoid it has exercised as detrimental an effect here as in the natural sciences; 30 but it appears on
a different plane and is very inadequately expressed by the contrast
between "ideas" and "facts." The real contrast is between ideas
which by being held by the people become the causes of a social
phenomenon and the ideas which people form about that phenomenon. That these two classes of ideas are distinct (although in different
contexts the distinction may have to be drawn differently 31 ) can
easily be shown. The changes in the opinions which people hold
about a particular commodity and which we recognize as the cause of
ous social structures or formations which

which our study has

to revise

a change in the price of that commodity stand clearly in a different
class from the ideas which the same people may have formed about
the causes of the change in price or about the "nature of value" in
general. Similarly, the beliefs and opinions which lead a number of
people regularly to repeat certain acts, e.g. to produce, sell, or buy

certain quantities of commodities, are entirely different from the
ideas they may have formed about the whole of the "society," or the

"economic system," to which they belong and which the aggregate of
all their actions constitutes. The first kind of opinions and beliefs are
a condition of the existence of the "wholes" which would not exist
without them; they are, as we have said, "constitutive," essential for
the existence of the phenomenon which the people refer to as "society" or the "economic system," but which will exist irrespectively
of the concepts which the people have formed about these wholes.
It is very important that we should carefully distinguish between
the motivating or constitutive opinions on the one hand and the
speculative or explanatory views which people have formed about
the wholes; confusion between the two is a source of constant danger.
Is it the ideas which the popular mind has formed about such collectives as "society" or the "economic system," "capitalism" or "imperialism," and other such collective entities, which the social scientist must regard as no more than provisional theories, popular

38

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

abstractions,

and which he must not mistake for

facts.

That he con-

sistently refrains from treating these pseudo-entities as "facts," and
that he systematically starts from the concepts which guide indi-

and not from the results of their theorizing
about their actions, is the characteristic feature of that methodological individualism which is closely connected with the subjectivism of

viduals in their actions

the social sciences.

The

scientistic

approach, on the other hand, be-

afraid of starting from the subjective concepts determining
individual actions, is, as we shall presently see, regularly led into the
very mistake it attempts to avoid, namely of treating as facts those

cause

it is

which are no more than popular generalizations. Trying
to avoid using as data the concepts held by individuals where they
are clearly recognizable and explicitly introduced as what they are,

collectives

views frequently and na'ively accept
the speculative concepts of popular usage as definite facts of the kind

people brought up in

scientistic

they are familiar with.

We shall have to discuss the nature of this collectivist prejudice inherent in the scientistic approach more fully in a later section.

A few more remarks must be added about the specific theoretical
method which corresponds to the systematic subjectivism and individualism of the social sciences.

From

the fact that

it is

the concepts

and views held by individuals which are directly known to us and
which form the elements from which we must build up, as it were,
the more complex phenomena, follows another important difference
between the method of the social disciplines and the natural sciences.
While in the former it is the attitudes of individuals which are the
familiar elements and by the combination of which we try to reproduce the complex phenomena, the results of individual actions, which
a procedure which often leads to the discovery
are much less known
of principles of structural coherence of the complex phenomena which
had not (and perhaps could not) be established by direct observation

the physical sciences necessarily begin with die complex pheof nature and work backwards to infer the elements from

nomena

which they are composed. The place where the human individual
stands in the order of things brings it about that in one direction
what he perceives are the comparatively complex phenomena which
he analyzes, while in the other direction what is given to him are ele-

THE INDIVIDUALIST AND "COMPOSITIVE" METHOD

39

ments from which those more complex phenomena are composed that
he cannot observe as wholes. 32 While the method of the natural sciis in this sense,
analytic, the method of the social sciences is
better described as compositive 33 or synthetic. It is the so-called
wholes, the groups of elements which are structurally connected,

ences

which we learn

to single out

from the

totality of

observed phenomena

only as a result to our systematic fitting together of the elements with
familiar properties, and which we build up or reconstruct from the

known

properties of the elements.

important to observe that in all this the various types of individual beliefs or attitudes are not themselves the object of our exIt is

planation, but merely the elements from which we build up the structure of possible relationships between individuals. In so far as we

analyze individual thought in the social sciences the purpose

is

not to

explain that thought but merely to distinguish the possible types of
elements with which we shall have to reckon in the construction of
different patterns of social relationships. It

careless expressions

believe that their

done

aim

by
is

is

a mistake, to which

social scientists often give countenance, to
if it can be
For the social
and all they have to

to explain conscious action. This,

at all, is a different task, the task of psychology.

sciences the types of conscious action are data 84
do with regard to these data is to arrange them in such orderly fash-

ion that they can be effectively used for their task. 85 The problems
which they try to answer arise only in so far as the conscious action

many men produce undesigned results, in so far as regularities are
observed which are not the result of anybody's design. If social phenomena showed no order except in so far as they were consciously
of

designed, there would indeed be no room for theoretical sciences of
society and there would be, as is often argued, only problems of psychology. It is only in so far as some sort of order arises as a result of
individual action but without being designed by any individual that
a problem is raised which demands a theoretical explanation. But although people dominated by the scientistic prejudice are often in-

clined to deny the existence of any such order (and thereby the existence of an object for theoretical sciences of society), few if any
would be prepared to do so consistently: that at least language shows

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

40

a definite order which
scarcely be questioned.

The reason

is

not the result of any conscious design can

of the difficulty which the natural scientist experiences

in admitting the existence of such an order in social phenomena is
that these orders cannot be stated in physical terms, that if we define

no such order is visible, and that the
which show an orderly arrangement do not (or at least need
not) have any physical properties in common (except that men react
to them in the "same" way
although the "sameness" of different

the elements in physical terms
units

people's reaction will again, as a rule, not be definable in physical
terms). It is an order in which things behave in the same way be-

mean the same thing to man. If, instead of regarding as
unlike
and
what appears so to the acting man, we were to take
for our units only what Science shows to be alike or unlike, we

cause they
alike

should probably find no recognizable order whatever in social pheat least not till the natural sciences had completed their

nomena

task of analysing all natural phenomena into their ultimate constituents and psychology had also fully achieved the reverse task of ex-

plaining in all detail how the ultimate units of physical science come
to appear to man just as they do, i.e., how that apparatus of classifi-

cation operates which our senses constitute.
It is only in the very simplest instances that

it can be shown briefly
and without any technical apparatus how the independent actions of
individuals will produce an order which is no part of their intentions;
and in those instances the explanation is usually so obvious that we
never stop to examine the type of argument which leads us to it. The
way in which footpaths are formed in a wild broken country is such
an instance. At first everyone will seek for himself what seems to him
the best path. But the fact that such a path has been used once is
likely to make it easier to traverse and therefore more likely to be
used again; and thus gradually more and more clearly defined tracks
arise and come to be used to the exclusion of other possible ways.
Human movements through the region come to conform to a definite

pattern which, although the result of deliberate decisions of

many

people, has yet not been consciously designed by anyone. This explanation of how this happens is an elementary "theory" applicable
to hundreds of particular historical instances;

and

it is

not the ob-

THE INDIVIDUALIST AND "COMPOSITIVE" METHOD

41

servation of the actual growth of any particular track, and still less of
many, from which this explanation derives its cogency, but from our

general knowledge of how we and other people behave in the kind of
situation in which the successive people find themselves who have to

seek their

way and who by

the cumulative effect of their action create

the path. It is the elements of the complex of events which are familiar to us from everyday experience, but it is only by a deliberate
effort of directed thought that we come to see the necessary effects
of the combination of such actions by many people. We "underway in which the result we observe can be produced, alwe
though
may never be in a position to watch the whole process or

stand" the

precise course and result.
It makes no difference for our present purpose whether the process
extends over a long period of time as it does in such cases as the evo-

to predict

its

the formation of language, or whether it is a
constantly repeated anew as in the case of the formation of prices or the direction of production under competition.
The former instances raise theoretical (i.e. generic) problems (as

lution of

money or

process which

is

distinguished from the specifically historical problems in the precise
sense which we shall have to define later) which are fundamentally
similar to the problems raised by such recurring phenomena as the
determination of prices. Although in the study of any particular in-

stance of the evolution of an "institution" like
the theoretical

problem

will frequently

money or the language
be so overlaid by the con-

sideration of the particular circumstances involved (the properly historical task), this does not alter the fact that any explanation of a
historical process involves

assumptions about the kind of circum-

stances that can produce certain kinds of effects
assumptions which,
where we have to deal with results which were not directly willed by

somebody, can only be stated in the form of a generic scheme, in
other words a theory.
The physicist who wishes to understand the problems of the social

from his own field would have
which he knew by direct observation the inside

sciences with the help of an analogy
to imagine a

world

in

of the atoms and had neither the possibility of making experiments
with lumps of matter nor opportunity to observe more than the interactions of a comparatively few atoms during a limited period.

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

42

From

his knowledge of the different kinds of atoms he could build
models
of all the various ways in which they could combine into
up
and make these models more and more closely reproduce
units
larger
all the features of the few instances in which he was able to observe
more complex phenomena. But the laws of the macrocosm which he
could derive from his knowledge of the microcosm would always remain "deductive"; they would, because of his limited knowledge of

the data of the complex situation, scarcely ever enable him to predict
the precise outcome of a particular situation; and he could never
confirm them by controlled experiment although they might be disproved by the observation of events which according to his theory

are impossible.
In a sense some problems of theoretical astronomy are more similar to those of the social sciences than those of any of the experi-

mental sciences. Yet there remain important differences. While the
astronomer aims at knowing all the elements of which his universe

composed, the student of social phenomena cannot hope to know
the types of elements from which his universe is made up.
He will scarcely ever know even of all the elements of which it consists and he will certainly never know all the relevant properties of
each of them. The inevitable imperfection of the human mind becomes here not only a basic datum about the object of explanation
but, since it applies no less to the observer, also a limitation on what
he can hope to accomplish in his attempt to explain the observed
facts. The number of separate variables which in any particular
is

more than

social

phenomenon

will

determine the result of a given change will
human mind to master and manipu-

as a rule be far too large for any

them effectively. 38 In consequence our knowledge of the principle by which these phenomena are produced will rarely if ever enable us to predict the precise result of any concrete situation. While
we can explain the principle on which certain phenomena are produced and can from this knowledge exclude the possibility of certain

late

results, e.g. of certain events occurring together,

our knowledge will

in a sense be only negative, i.e. it will merely enable us to preclude
certain results but not enable us to narrow the range of possibilities
sufficiently so that only one remains.

The

distinction

between an explanation merely of the principle on

THE INDIVIDUALIST AND "COMPOSITIVE" METHOD

43

which a phenomenon

is produced and an explanation which enables
us to predict the precise result is of great importance for the understanding of the theoretical methods of the social sciences. It arises, I

believe, also elsewhere, e.g. in biology,
It is,

however, somewhat unfamiliar and

adequately explained.
sciences

is

The

and

certainly in psychology.

know no

place where it is
best illustration in the field of the social
I

probably the general theory of prices as represented,

e.g.,

by the Walrasian or Paretian systems of equations. These systems
show merely the principle of coherence between the prices of the
various types of commodities of which the system is composed; but
without knowledge of the numerical values of all the constants which
occur in it and which we never do know, this does not enable us to
87
predict the precise results which any particular change will have.
from
this
a
set
of
which
shows
particular case,
Apart
equations
merely the form of a system of relationships but does not give the
values of the constants contained in
illustration of

it, is perhaps the best general
an explanation merely of the principle on which any

phenomenon

is produced.
This must suffice as a positive description of the characteristic

problems of the social sciences.

It will

become

clearer as

we

contrast

in the following sections the specific procedure of the social sciences
with the most characteristic aspects of the attempts to treat their

object after the fashion of the natural sciences.

V

THE OBJECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

THE GREAT DIFFERENCES between

the characteristic methods of the

physical sciences and those of the social sciences explain why the
natural scientist who turns to the work of the professional students

phenomena so often feels that he has got among a company
of people who habitually commit all the mortal sins which he is most
careful to avoid, and that a science of society conforming to his
of social

standards does not yet exist. From this to the attempt to create a new
science of society which satisfies his conception of Science is but a
step. During the last four generations attempts of this kind have been
constantly made; and though they have never produced the results
which had been expected, and though they did not even succeed in

creating that continuous tradition which is the symptom of a healthy
discipline, they are repeated almost every month by someone who

hopes thereby to revolutionize social thought. Yet, though these
forts are
istic

ef-

mostly disconnected, they regularly show certain character-

features

which we must now consider. These methodological

features can be conveniently treated under the headings of "objectivism," "collectivism," and "historicism," corresponding to the "subjectivism," the "individualism," and the theoretical character of the
developed disciplines of social study.

The attitude which, for want of a better term, we shall call the
"objectivism" of the scientistic approach to the study of man and
society, has found its most characteristic expression in the various
attempts to dispense with our subjective knowledge of the working of
the human mind, attempts which in various forms have affected almost all branches of social study. From Auguste Comte's denial of
the possibility of introspection, through various attempts to create an

44

THE OBJECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

45

"objective psychology," down to the behaviorism of J. B. Watson
and the "physicalism" of O. Neurath, a long series of authors have

attempted to do without the knowledge derived from "introspection."
But, as can be easily shown, these attempts to avoid the use of
knowledge which we possess are bound to break down.

A

behaviorist or physicalist, to be consistent, ought not to begin
by observing the reactions of people to what our senses tell us are
similar objects; he ought to confine himself to studying the reactions
identical in a strictly physical sense. He ought,
e.g., not to study the reactions of persons who are shown a red circle
or made to hear a certain tune, but solely the effects of a light wave
to stimuli

which are

of a certain frequency

human

eye, etc., etc.

No

on a

particular point of the retina of the

behaviorist, however, seriously contemplates

doing so. They all take it naively for granted that what appears alike
to us will also appear alike to other people. Though they have no
business to do so, they make constant use of the classification of ex-

by our senses and our mind as alike or unlike, a
which we know only from our personal experience of

ternal stimuli

classi-

fication

it

and

which is not based on any objective tests showing that these facts
also behave similarly in relation to each other. This applies as much
to what we commonly regard as simple sense qualities, such as
color, the pitch of sound, smell, etc., as to our perception of configurations (Gestalteri) by which we classify physically very different
things as specimens of a particular "shape," e.g., as a circle or a
certain tune. To the behaviorist or physicalist the fact that we recog-

nize these things as similar

is

no problem.
is in no way

This naive attitude, however,

justified

development of physical science itself teaches us. As
38
one of the main results of this development
before,

by what the

we have
is

seen

that things

may not be alike in any objective sense, i.e.,
no
other
have
may
properties in common. Once we have to recogthat
nize, however,
things differ in their effects on our senses not
the
in
same
necessarily
way in which they differ in their behavior towards each other, we are no longer entitled to take it for granted that
what to us appears alike or different will also appear so to others.
That this is so as a rule is an important empirical fact which, on the
one hand, demands explanation (a task for psychology) and which,
that to us appear alike

46

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

on the other hand, must be accepted as a basic datum in our study
of people's conduct. That different objects mean the same thing to
different people, or that different people mean the same thing by different acts, remain important facts though physical science may show
that these objects or acts possess no other common properties.
It is true, of course, that we know nothing about other people's

minds except through sense perceptions, i.e., the observation of
physical facts. But this does not mean that we know nothing but
physical facts. Of what kind the facts are with which we have to deal
in any discipline is not determined by all the properties possessed by
the concrete objects to which the discipline applies, but only by those

properties by which we classify them for the purposes of the discipline in question. To take an example from the physical sciences: all

pendulums of which we can conceive have chemical and
optical properties; but when we talk about levers or pendulums we
do not talk about chemical or optical facts. What makes a number of
individual phenomena facts of one kind are the attributes which we
select in order to treat them as members of one class. And though all
social phenomena with which we can possibly be concerned will possess physical attributes, this does not mean that they must be physical
levers or

facts for

The

our purpose.

significant point

about the objects of

which we are concerned

human

in the social sciences,

activity with

and about these

human activities themselves, is that in interpreting human activities
we spontaneously and unconsciously class together as instances of
same object or the same act any one of a large number of physiwhich may have no physical property in common. We know
that other people like ourselves regard any one of a large number of
the

cal facts

physically different things, a, b f c, d,

.

.

.

etc.,

as belonging to the

and we know this because other people, like ourselves,
react to any one of these things by any one of the movements a, (3,
which again may have no physical property in common. Yet
y, 8,
this knowledge on which we constantly act, which must necessarily
precede, and is pre-supposed by, any communication with other men,

same

class;

.

is

.

.

not conscious knowledge in the sense that

we

are in a position ex-

haustively to enumerate all the different physical phenomena which
we unhesitatingly recognize as members of the class: we do not

THE OBJECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

know which of many
we shall recognize as

47

possible combinations of physical properties
a certain word, or as a "friendly face" or a

"threatening gesture." Probably in no single instance has experimental research yet succeeded in precisely determining the range of
different phenomena which we unhesitatingly treat as meaning the
to us as well as to other people; yet we constantly and
successfully act on the assumption that we do classify these things in
are not in a position
and
the same manner as other people do.

same thing

We

may never be in the position to substitute objects defined in physical
terms for the mental categories we employ in talking about other
39
Whenever we do so the physical facts to which we
people's actions.
refer are significant not as physical facts, i.e., not as members of a

which have certain physical properties in common, but as
what may be physically completely different
things but which "mean" the same thing to us.
It becomes necessary here to state explicitly a consideration which
is implied in the whole of our argument on this point and which,
though it seems to follow from the modern conception of the charclass all of

members

of a class of

acter of physical research,

is

yet

somewhat

still

unfamiliar. It

is

that

such as "concepts" or "ideas," which
are commonly recognized as "abstractions," but all mental phe-

not only those mental

entities,

nomena, sense perceptions and images as well as the more abstract
"concepts" and "ideas," must be regarded as acts of classification performed by the brain. 40 This is, of course, merely another way of saying that the qualities which

we

perceive are not properties of the ob(individually or as a race) have learnt to
or
To perceive is to assign to a faexternal
stimuli.
group
classify
miliar category (or categories): we could not perceive anything

jects but ways in which

we

completely different from everything else we have ever perceived beThis does not mean, however, that everything which we actually

fore.

must possess
react in the same

class together

that

we

common
way

properties additional to the fact

to these things. It

is

a

common

dangerous error to believe that things which our senses or our
treat as members of the same class must have something else in

mon beyond

but

mind
com-

being registered in the same manner by our mind. Al-

objective justification why we
regard certain things as similar, this need not always be the case. But

though there

will usually exist

some

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

48

while in our study of nature classifications which are not based on
any similarity in the behavior of the objects towards each other must

be treated as "deceptions" of which we must free ourselves, they are
of positive significance in our attempts to understand human action.
The important difference between the position of these mental categories in the two spheres is that when we study the working of ex-

and thoughts are not links in the chain
are
they
merely about them; but in the mechanism of society they form an essential link, the forces here at work
operate through these mental entities which are directly known to us:
while the things in the external world do not behave alike or differternal nature our sensations

of observed events

ently because they appear alike to us, we do behave in a similar or
manner because the things appear alike or different to us.

different

The

behaviorist or physicalist

who

in studying

human

behavior

wished really to avoid using the categories which we find ready in
our mind, and who wanted to confine himself strictly to the study of
man's reactions to objects defined in physical terms, would consistently have to refuse to say anything about human actions till he had
experimentally established how our senses and our mind group external stimuli as alike or unlike. He would have to begin by asking

which physical objects appear alike to us and which do not (and how
it comes about that they do) before he could seriously undertake to
study

human

It is

behavior towards these things.
important to observe that our contention

is

not that such an

attempt to explain the principle of how our mind or our brain transforms physical facts into mental entities is impossible. Once we recognize this as a process of classification there is no reason why we
should not learn to understand the principle on which it operates.
Classification is, after all, a mechanical process, i.e., a process which
could be performed by a machine which "sorts out" and groups ob41
jects according to certain properties.

the

first

Our argument

is,

rather, in

instance, that for the task of the social sciences such an ex-

planation of the formation of mental entities and their relations to

which they represent is unnecessary, and that such
an explanation would help us in no way in our task; and, secondly,
that such an explanation, although conceivable, is not only not
available at present and not likely to be available for a long time yet,
the physical facts

THE OBJECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

49

but also unlikely to be ever more than an "explanation of the prin42
on which this apparatus of classification works. It would

ciple"

seem

would always have to posany one of the different
which
it
and
this
if
is
correct
it would follow that it
classifies;
things
is impossible that our brain should ever be able to
produce a comfrom
mere
a
plete explanation (as distinguished
explanation of the
the
of
in
it
which
itself classifies external
principle)
particular ways
stimuli. We shall later have to consider the significance of the related
paradox that to "explain" our own knowledge would require that we
should know more than we actually do, which is, of course, a selfthat any apparatus of classification

sess a degree of complexity greater than

contradictory statement.
But let us assume for the

moment

that

we had succeeded

in fully

mental phenomena to physical processes. Assume that
reducing
we knew the mechanism by which our central nervous system groups
all

or /,
any one of the (elementary or complex) stimuli, a, b, c,
or r, s, t,
into definite classes determined by the fact
m, n,
that to any member of one class we shall react by any one of the
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

members

of the corresponding classes or reactions a, (3, y>
or v
both
that
this
This
cp, x> ty
system
assumption implies
not merely familiar to us as the way in which our own mind acts,

|, o,
is

.

.

.

but that

or

we

know all the relations by which it is deterwe also know the mechanism by which the classifica-

explicitly

mined, and that

We

is actually effected.
should then be able strictly to correlate
should
the mental entities with definite groups of physical facts.

tion

We

we

should be in no better position
with respect to the specific task of the social sciences than we are
now. We should still have to use the old categories, though we should
thus have "unified" science, but

be able to explain their formation and though we should know the
physical facts "behind" them. Although we should know that a different arrangement of the facts of nature is more appropriate for
explaining external events, in interpreting human actions we should
still have to use the classification in which these facts actually appear

minds of the acting people. Thus, quite apart from the fact
to wait forever till we were able to
mental entities, even if this were
the
for
facts
substitute physical

in the

that

we should probably have

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

50

achieved

we should be no

better equipped for the task

we have

to

solve in the social sciences.
43
and in
idea, implied in Comte's hierarchy of the sciences
similar arguments, that the social sciences must in some sense

The

many

be "based" on the physical sciences, that they can only hope for
success after the physical sciences have advanced far enough to enable us to treat social

in physical terms, in "physical lanerroneous.
The problem of explaining
guage," is, therefore, entirely
mental processes by physical ones is entirely distinct from the prob-

phenomena

lems of the social sciences, it is a problem for physiological psychology. But whether it is solved or not, for the social sciences the given
mental entities must provide the starting point, whether their forma-

been explained or not.
cannot discuss here all the other forms in which the character-

tion has

We
istic

"objectivism" of the scientistic approach has

We

led to error in the social sciences.
historical survey, find this

of the objects of

human

made

shall, in the

itself felt

and

course of our

tendency to look for the "real" attributes
which lie behind men's views about

activity

them, represented in a great
vey can be attempted here.

many

Only a

different ways.

brief sur-

Nearly as important as the various forms of behaviorism, and
closely connected with them,

is

the

common

tendency in the study

of social

phenomena to attempt to disregard all the "merely" qualitative phenomena and to concentrate, on the model of the natural
sciences, on the quantitative aspects, on what is measurable. We have
44

how in the natural sciences this tendency is a necessary
of
their specific task of replacing the picture of the
consequence
world in terms of sense qualities by one in which the units are deseen before

fined

exclusively by their explicit relations.
in that field has brought it about that

method

The

success of this

now

generally reas
the
hall-mark
of
all
scientific
garded
genuinely
procedure. Yet its
raison d'etre, the need to replace the classification of events which
it is

our senses and our mind provide by a more appropriate one, is abwe try to understand human beings, and where this understanding is made possible by the fact that we have a mind like

sent where

and that from the mental categories we have in common with
them we can reconstruct the social complexes which are our con-

theirs,

THE OBJECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

51

The blind transfer of the striving for quantitative measurements 46 to a field in which the specific conditions are not present
which give it its basic importance in the natural sciences, is the result
of an entirely unfounded prejudice. It is probably responsible for
the worst aberrations and absurdities produced by scientism in the

cern.

social sciences. It not only leads frequently to the selection for study
of the most irrelevant aspects of the phenomena because they happen to be measurable, but also to "measurements" and assignments

of numerical values which are absolutely meaningless.

What a

tinguished philosopher recently wrote about psychology

is

dis-

at least

equally true of the social sciences, namely that it is only too easy
"to rush off to measure something without considering what it is we
are measuring, or what measurement means. In this respect some

recent measurements are of the

same

logical type as Plato's deter-

mination that a just ruler is 729 times as happy as an unjust one." 4e
Closely connected with the tendency to treat the objects of human
activity in

terms of their "real" attributes instead of as what they

appear to the acting people is the propensity to conceive of the student of society as endowed with a kind of super-mind, with some sort
of absolute knowledge, which makes it unnecessary for him to start
from what is known by the people whose actions he studies. Among
the most characteristic manifestations of this tendency are the various
forms of social "energetics" which, from the earlier attempts of Ernest Solvay, Wilhelm Ostwald and F. Soddy down to our own day * 7
have constantly reappeared among scientists and engineers when
they turned to the problems of social organization. The idea underis that, as science is supposed to teach that everybe
can
thing
ultimately reduced to quantities of energy, man should

lying these theories

in his plans treat the various things not according to the concrete

usefulness they possess for the purposes for which he knows how to
use them, but as the interchangeable units of abstract energy which

they "really" are.

Another, hardly

less

crude and even more widespread, example

of this tendency is the conception of the "objective" possibilities of
production, of the quantity of social output which the physical facts

make possible, an idea
in
pression
quantitative estimates of the
are supposed to

which frequently finds exsupposed "productive ca-

52

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

pacity" of society as a whole. These estimates regularly refer, not to
what men can produce by means of any stated organization, but to

what

some undefined "objective" sense "could" be produced from
Most of these assertions have no ascertainwhatever.
meaning
They do not mean that x or y or any parin

the available resources.

able

What they
among many people

ticular organization of

people could achieve these things.

amount

the knowledge dispersed

to is that

if all

could be mastered by a single mind, and // this master-mind could
make all the people act at all times as he wished, certain results
could be achieved; but these results could, of course, not be known

anybody except to such a master-mind. It need hardly be pointed
out that an assertion about a "possibility" which is dependent on

to

such conditions has no relation to reality. There is no such thing as
the productive capacity of society in the abstract
apart from particular forms of organization. The only fact which we can regard as
given is that there are particular people who have certain concrete

knowledge about the way in which particular things can be used for
particular purposes. This knowledge never exists as an integrated
whole or in one mind, and the only knowledge that can in any sense
be said to

exist are these separate

and often inconsistent and even

conflicting views of different people.
Of very similar nature are the frequent statements about the "objective" needs of the people, where "objective" is merely a name for

somebody's views about what the people ought to want. We shall
have to consider further manifestations of this "objectivism" towards
the end of this part when we turn from the consideration of scientism proper to the effects of the characteristic outlook of the engineer, whose conceptions of "efficiency" have been one of the most

powerful forces through which
views on social problems.

this

attitude

has affected current

VI
THE COLLECTIVISM
OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH
CLOSELY CONNECTED WITH

the "objectivism" of the scientistic ap-

tendency to treat "wholes"
"economy," "capitalism" (as a given historical
or
a
"phase")
particular "industry" or "class" or "country" as definitely given objects about which we can discover laws by observing
their behavior as wholes. While the specific subjectivist approach

proach

is its

methodological collectivism,

its

like "society" or the

of the social sciences starts, as we have seen, from our knowledge of
the inside of these social complexes, the knowledge of the individual

which form the elements of their structure, the objectivism
48
it treats
tries to view them from the outside
social phenomena not as something of which the human mind is a
part and the principles of whose organization we can reconstruct
from the familiar parts, but as if they were objects directly perceived
attitudes

of the natural sciences

;

by us as wholes.
There are several reasons why this tendency should so frequently
show itself with natural scientists. They are used to seek first for
empirical regularities in the relatively complex

phenomena

that are

immediately given to observation, and only after they have found
such regularities to try and explain them as the product of a combination of other, often purely hypothetical, elements (constructs)
to behave according to simpler and more general
are therefore inclined to seek in the social field, too, first

which are assumed
rules.

They

for empirical regularities in the behavior of the complexes before
they feel that there is need for a theoretical explanation. This tend-

ency

is

further strengthened by the experience that there are few
which can be established

regularities in the behavior of individuals

53

54

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

in a strictly objective manner; and they turn therefore to the wholes
in the hope that they will show such regularities. Finally, there is the

rather vague idea that since "social phenomena" are to be the object
of study, the obvious procedure is to start from the direct observation

of these "social phenomena," where the existence in popular usage of
such terms as "society" or "economy" is naively taken as evidence
that there must be definite "objects" corresponding to them. The
fact that people all talk about "the nation" or "capitalism" leads to
the belief that the first step in the study of these phenomena must be

go and see what they are like, just as we should
a particular stone or a particular animal. 49

to

if

we heard about

The

error involved in this collectivist approach is that it mistakes
for facts what are no more than provisional theories, models con-

by the popular mind to explain the connection between some
phenomena which we observe. The paradoxical
50
that those who
aspect of it, however, is, as we have seen before,
by the scientistic prejudice are led to approach social phenomena in
this manner are induced, by their very anxiety to avoid all merely
subjective elements and to confine themselves to "objective facts,"
to commit the mistake they are most anxious to avoid, namely that
of treating as facts what are no more than vague popular theories.

structed

of the individual

They thus become, when they

least suspect it, the victims of the
familiar by A. N. Whitehead
realism"
of
(made
fallacy
"conceptual
as the "fallacy of misplaced concreteness").
The naive realism which uncritically assumes that where there are

commonly used concepts
which they describe
social

phenomena

oneselves from

it.

is

that

there

must also be definite "given" things
embedded in current thought about

so deeply
it

requires a deliberate effort of will to free
will readily admit that in this

While most people

may exist special difficulties in recognizing
we have never many specimens of a kind

wholes

field there

definite

because

before us and

therefore cannot readily distinguish their constant from their merely
accidental attributes, few are aware that there is a much more fun-

damental obstacle: that the wholes as such are never given to our
observation but are without exception constructions of our mind.
They are not "given facts," objective data of a similar kind which we
spontaneously recognize as similar by their

common

physical attri-

THE COLLECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

55

They cannot be perceived at all apart from a mental scheme
shows the connection between some of the many individual facts
which we can observe. Where we have to deal with such social
wholes we cannot (as we do in the natural sciences) start from the
observation of a number of instances which we recognize spontanebutes.

that

ously by their

common

sense attributes as instances of "societies" or

"economies," "capitalisms" or "nations," "languages" or "legal systems," and where only after we have collected a sufficient number of
instances we begin to seek for common laws which they obey. Social

wholes are not given to us as what we may call "natural units" which
we recognize as similar with our senses, as we do with flowers or
minerals or light-rays, or even forests or ant-heaps. They
are not given to us as similar things before we even begin to ask
whether what looks alike to us also behaves in the same manner.
butterflies,

The terms

for collectives

which we

all

readily use

do not designate

definite things in the sense of stable collections of sense attributes

which we recognize as

alike by inspection; they refer to certain strucbetween some of the many things which we
can observe within given spatial and temporal limits and which we
select because we think that we can discern connections between
them connections which may or may not exist in fact.

tures of relationships

What we group
whole are

different

together as instances of the same collective or
complexes of individual events, by themselves

perhaps quite dissimilar, but believed by us to be related to each
other in a similar manner; they are selections of certain elements of
a complex picture on the basis of a theory about their coherence.
They do not stand for definite things or classes of things (if we un-

derstand the term "thing" in any material or concrete sense) but
for a pattern or order in which different things may be related to

each other an order which is not a spatial or temporal order but
can be defined only in terms of relations which are intelligible human
attitudes.

This order or pattern

is

as

little

perceptible as a physical

can be studied only by folthe
of
the
lowing up
particular combination of relationimplications
In
other
the
wholes
about which we speak exist only
words,
ships.
and
to
the
the
extent to which,
if,
theory is correct which we have
formed about the connection of the parts which they imply, and
fact as these relations themselves;

and

it

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

56

which we can

explicitly state only in the

form of a model

built

from

those relationships. 51

The

do not deal with "given" wholes but
wholes by constructing models from
the familiar elements
models which reproduce the structure of relationships between some of the many phenomena which we always
simultaneously observe in real life. This is no less true of the popular
concepts of social wholes which are represented by the terms current
social sciences, thus,

their task is to constitute these

in ordinary language; they too refer to mental models, but instead of
a precise description they convey merely vague and indistinct sug-

gestions of the way in which certain phenomena are connected.
Sometimes the wholes constituted by the theoretical social sciences

roughly correspond with the wholes to which the popular concepts refer, because popular usage has succeeded in approximately
separating the significant from the accidental; sometimes the wholes
will

by theory may refer to entirely new structural connecwhich we did not know before systematic study commenced
and for which ordinary language has not even a name. If we take
current concepts like those of a "market" or of "capital," the popular meaning of these words corresponds at least in some measure to
the similar concepts which we have to form for theoretical purposes,
although even in these instances the popular meaning is far too vague
to allow the use of these terms without first giving them a more precise meaning. If they can be retained in theoretical work at all it is,
however, because in these instances even the popular concepts have

constituted
tions of

long ceased to describe particular concrete things, definable in physical terms, and have come to cover a great variety of different things

which are classed together

solely because of a recognized similarity
in the structure of the relationships between men and things.
"market," e.g., has long ceased to mean only the periodical meeting

A

men at a fixed place to which they bring their products to sell
them from temporary wooden stalls. It now covers any arrangements
for regular contacts between potential buyers and sellers of any thing
that can be sold, whether by personal contact, by telephone or teleof

graph, by advertising,

etc., etc.

When, however, we speak
tem" as a whole and

52

of the behavior of, e.g., the "price sysdiscuss the complex of connected changes which

THE COLLECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH
will

we

correspond in certain conditions to a

the rate of interest,

are not concerned with a whole that obtrudes itself

notice or that

following

and

fall in

its

is

up the

ever definitely given;
reactions of

immediate

effects.

many

That

57

on popular

we can

only reconstruct it by
individuals to the initial change

in this case certain

changes "belong

number of other changes which in
together"
among
concrete
situation
will
any
always occur simultaneously with them
and which will often swamp those which form part of the complex
that

the large

which we are interested, a few form a more closely interrelated
complex we do not know from observing that these particular
changes regularly occur together. That would indeed be impossible
because what in different circumstances would have to be regarded
as the same set of changes could not be determined by any of the
in

physical attributes of the things but only by singling out certain
relevant aspects in the attitudes of men towards the things; and this
can be done only by the help of the models we have formed.

The mistake of treating as definite objects "wholes" that are no
more than constructions, and that can have no properties except
those which follow from the way in which we have constructed them
from the elements, has probably appeared most frequently in the
form of the various theories about a "social" or "collective" mind es
and has in this connection raised all sorts of pseudo-problems. The
same idea is frequently but imperfectly concealed under the attributes of "personality" or "individuality" which are ascribed to society.
Whatever the name, these terms always mean that, instead of reconstructing the wholes from the relations between individual minds
which we directly know, a vaguely apprehended whole is treated as
something akin to the individual mind. It is in this form that in the
social sciences an illegitimate use of anthropomorphic concepts has
had as harmful an effect as the use of such concepts in the natural

The remarkable thing here is, again, that it should so frebe
the empiricism of the positivists, the arch-enemies of any
quently
anthropomorphic concepts even where they are in place, which leads
them to postulate such metaphysical entities and to treat humanity,
as for instance Comte does, as one "social being," a kind of super-

sciences.

person. But as there is no other possibility than either to compose
the whole from the individual minds or to postulate a super-mind in

58

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

the image of the individual mind,

and as

positivists reject the first

of these alternatives, they are necessarily driven to the second. We
have here the root of that curious alliance between 19th century
positivism

The

and Hegelianism which will occupy us in a later study.
approach to social phenomena has not often been

collectivist

so emphatically proclaimed as when the founder of sociology, Auguste Comte, asserted with respect to them that, as in biology, "the

whole of the object is here certainly much better known and more
54
than the constituent parts. This view has
immedately accessible"
exercised a lasting influence on that scientistic study of society which
he attempted to create. Yet the particular similarity between the objects of biology and those of sociology, which fitted so well in
Comte's hierarchy of the sciences, does not in fact exist. In biology
we do indeed first recognize as things of one kind natural units,

which we find many inwe spontaneously recognize as alike. We can, therefore, begin by asking why these definite sets of attributes regularly
occur together. But where we have to deal with social wholes or
stable combinations of sense properties, of

stances which

structures

it is

not the observation of the regular coexistence of cerwhich teaches us that they belong together or form

tain physical facts

We

do not

observe that the parts always occur together
and afterwards ask what holds them together; but it is only because
we know the ties that hold them together that we can select a few
a whole.

first

elements from the immensely complicated world around us as parts
of a connected whole.

We

shall presently see that

Comte and many

others regard social

phenomena as given wholes in yet another, different, sense, contending that concrete social phenomena can be understood only by considering the totality of everything that can be found within certain
spatio-temporal boundaries, and that any attempt to select parts or
aspects as systematically connected is bound to fail. In this form the

argument amounts

phenomena

to a denial of the possibility of a theory of social

as developed, e.g.,

what has been misnamed the

by economics, and leads directly to

method" with which, indeed,
connected.
We shall have to
closely
discuss this view below under the heading of "historicism."
methodological collectivism

"historical

is

THE COLLECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

The endeavor

to grasp social

phenomena

59

as "wholes" finds

its

most

characteristic expression in the desire to gain a distant and
comprehensive view in the hope that thus regularities will reveal
themselves which remain obscure at closer range. Whether it is the

conception of an observer from a distant planet, which has always
been a favorite with positivists from Condorcet to Mach, 55 or

whether

it is

the survey of long stretches of time through

which

it is

hoped that constant configurations or regularities will reveal themselves, it is always the same endeavor to get away from our inside
knowledge of human affairs and to gain a view of the kind which, it is

commanded by somebody who was not himself
men in the same relation as that in which we

supposed, would be
a man but stood to

stand to the external world.

This distant and comprehensive view of human events at which the
approach aims is now often described as the "macroscopic

scientistic

view."

It

would probably be

better called the telescopic view (meanunless it be the view through the inverted

ing simply the distant view
telescope!) since its aim is deliberately to ignore what we can see
only from the inside. In the "macrocosm" which this approach

attempts to see, and in the "macrodynamic" theories which it endeavors to produce, the elements would not be individual human
beings but collectives, constant configurations which, it is presumed,
strictly objective terms.

could be defined and described in
In most instances

this belief that the total view will enable us to
wholes
distinguish
by objective criteria, however, proves to be just
an illusion. This becomes evident as soon as we seriously try to im-

agine of what the macrocosm would consist if we were really to dispense with our knowledge of what things mean to the acting men,

and

if

we merely observed

the actions of

men

as

we observe an

ant-

heap or a bee-hive. In the picture such a study could produce there
could not appear such things as means or tools, commodities or

money, crimes or punishments, or words or sentences;

it

could con-

tain only physical objects defined either in terms of the sense attributes they present to the observer or even in purely relational terms.

And
show

since the

human
no

behavior towards the physical objects would
regularities discernible to such an observer, since

practically
in a great

men would

many

instances not appear to react alike to

60

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

things which would to the observer seem to be the same, nor differently to what appeared to him to be different, he could not hope
to achieve an explanation of their actions unless he had first succeeded

way in which men's senses and
men's minds pictured the external world to them. The famous
observer from Mars, in other words, before he could understand
even as much of human affairs as the ordinary man does, would
have to reconstruct from our behavior those immediate data of our
mind which to us form the starting-point of any interpretation of
in reconstructing in full detail the

human action.
If we are not more aware

of the difficulties which would be

encountered by an observer not possessed of a human mind, this is so
because we never seriously imagine the possibility that any being
with which we are familiar might command sense perceptions or
knowledge denied to us. Rightly or wrongly we tend to assume that
the other minds which we encounter can differ from ours only by
being inferior, so that everything which they perceive or know can
also be perceived or be known to us. The only way in which we can
form an approximate idea of what our position would be if we had
to deal with an organism as complicated as ours but organized on a
different principle, so that we should not be able to reproduce its
working on the analogy of our own mind, is to conceive that we had
to study the behavior of people with a knowledge vastly superior to
our own. If, e.g., we had developed our modern scientific technique
while still confined to a part of our planet, and then had made
contact with other parts inhabited by a race which had advanced
knowledge much further, we clearly could not hope to understand
many of their actions by merely observing what they did and without directly learning from them their knowledge. It would not be

from observing them in action that we should acquire their knowledge, but it would be through being taught their knowledge that we
should learn to understand their actions.

There is yet another argument which we must briefly consider
which supports the tendency to look at social phenomena "from the
outside," and which is easily confused with the methodological collectivism of which we have spoken though it is really distinct from
it. Are not social phenomena, it may be asked, from their definition

THE COLLECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH
mass phenomena, and

61

not obvious, therefore, that we can hope
them only if we investigate them by the
the study of mass phenomena, i.e., statistics?
is it

to discover regularities in

method developed

Now

for

study of certain phenomena, such
which form the object of vital statistics and which, as has
been mentioned before, are sometimes also described as social phenomena, although they are essentially distinct from those with which we
this is certainly true of the

as those

are here concerned.

more

instructive than to

compare the nature of these
which the same word "collective" is sometimes
also applied, with that of the wholes or collectives with which we
have to deal in the theoretical social sciences. The statistical study
is concerned with the attributes of individuals, though not with
attributes of particular individuals, but with attributes of which we
Nothing

statistical

know

is

wholes, to

only that they are possessed by a certain quantitatively deterall the individuals in our "collective" or "popula-

mined proportion of

any collection of individuals should form a true
statistical collective it is even necessary that the attributes of the
individuals whose frequency distribution we study should not be
systematically connected or, at least, that in our selection of the
individuals which form the "collective" we are not guided by any
knowledge of such a connection. The "collectives" of statistics, on
which we study the regularities produced by the "law of large
numbers," are thus emphatically not wholes in the sense in which
we describe social structures as wholes. This is best seen from the
fact that the properties of the "collectives" with statistics studies must
remain unaffected if from the total of elements we select at random
a certain part. Far from dealing with structures of relationships,
statistics deliberately and systematically disregard the relationships
between the individual elements. It is, to repeat, concerned with

tion." In order that

the properties of the elements of the "collective," though not with
the properties of particular elements, but with the frequency with
which elements with certain properties occur among the total. And,

what

is more, it assumes that these properties are not systematically
connected with the different ways in which the elements are related

to each other.

The consequence

of this

is

that in the statistical study of social

62

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE
the structures with which the theoretical social sciences

phenomena

are concerned

actually disappear. Statistics may supply us with
very interesting and important information about what is the raw
material from which we have to reproduce these structures, but it
can tell us nothing about these structures themselves. In some field
this is

immediately obvious as soon as it is stated. That the statistics
tell us nothing about the structure of a language will

of words can

hardly be denied. But although the contrary is sometimes suggested,
the same holds no less true of other systematically connected wholes
as, e.g., the price system. No statistical information about the
elements can explain to us the properties of the connected wholes.
Statistics could produce knowledge of the properties of the wholes

such

only if it had information about statistical collectives the elements
of which were wholes, i.e., if we had statistical information about
the properties of many languages, many price systems, etc. But, quite
apart from the practical limitations imposed on us by the limited

number

of instances which are

known

to us, there

is

an even more

serious obstacle to the statistical study of these wholes: the fact which
we have already discussed, that these wholes and their properties are
not given to our observation but can only be formed or composed

by us from

their parts.

What we have said applies, however, by no means to
by the name of statistics in the social sciences. Much
described

is

not

statistics in

the strict

modern sense of

all

that goes

that

is

thus

the term;

it

does not deal with mass phenomena at all, but is called statistics only
in the older, wider sense of the word in which it is used for any
descriptive information about the State or society. Though the term
be used only where the descriptive data are of quanti-

will to-day

tative nature, this should not lead us to confuse
statistics in

we

the narrower sense.

ordinarily

Most

meet, such as trade

it

with the science of

of the economic statistics which
statistics,

figures

about price

changes, and most "time series," or statistics of the "national income,"
are not data to which the technique appropriate to the investigation
of mass phenomena can be applied. They are just "measurements"
and frequently measurements of the type already discussed at the end

of Section

V

above. If they refer to significant

phenomena they may

be very interesting as information about the conditions existing

at

THE COLLECTIVISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

63

a particular moment. But unlike statistics proper, which may indeed
help us to discover important regularities in the social world (though
regularities of an entirely different order from those with which the
theoretical sciences of society deal), there is no reason to expect
measurements will ever reveal anything to us which is of

that these

significance beyond the particular place and time at which they have
been made. That they cannot produce generalizations does, of course,
not mean that they may not be useful, even very useful; they will
often provide us with the data to which our theoretical generalizations
must be applied to be of any practical use. They are an instance of
the historical information about a particular situation the significance
of which we must further consider in the next sections.

VII
THE

HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

To

SEE THE "historicism"

which we must now turn described as a

to

may cause surprise since it is
usually represented as the opposite to the treatment of social phenomena on the model of the natural sciences. But the view for which

product of the

scientistic

approach

is properly used (and which must not be confused with the
method of historical study) proves on closer consideration to be
a result of the same prejudices as the other typical scientistic miscon-

this

term

true

ceptions of social phenomena. If the suggestion that historicism is a
form rather than the opposite of scientism has still somewhat the
appearance of a paradox, this is so because the term is used in two
different and in some respect opposite and yet frequently confused
senses: for the older view which justly contrasted the specific task
of the historian with that of the scientist and which denied the possibility of a theoretical science of history, and for the later view which,
on the contrary, affirms that history is the only road which can lead
to a theoretical science of social phenomena. However great is the
contrast between these two views sometimes called "historicism"
if we take them in their extreme
common to have made possible a

transition

from the

historical

method of

historicism which attempts to
science of social phenomena.

The

forms, they have yet enough in
gradual and almost unperceived

make

the historian to the scientistic

history a "science"

and the only

older historical school, whose growth has recently been so well

described by the German historian Meinecke, though under the misarose mainly in opposition to certain
leading name of Historismus

and "pragmatic" tendencies of some, particularly French,
18th century views. Its emphasis was on the singular or unique

generalizing

64

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

65

(individuell) character of all historical phenomena which could be
understood only genetically as the joint result of many forces working
through long stretches of time. Its strong opposition to the "pragmatic" interpretation, which regards social institutions as the product

of conscious design, implies in fact the use of a "compositive" theory
which explains how such institutions can arise as the unintended
result of the separate actions of many individuals. It is significant
that among the fathers of this view Edmund Burke is one of the

most important and

Adam

Smith occupies an honorable place.
method implies theory, i.e., an underYet, although
of
the
of
structural
coherence of the social wholes,
standing
principles
the historians who employed it not only did not systematically develop such theories and were hardly aware that they used them; but
their just dislike of any generalization about historical developments
also tended to give their teaching an anti-theoretical bias which, althis historical

though originally aimed only against the wrong kind of theory, yet
created the impression that the main difference between the methods
appropriate to the study of natural and to that of social phenomena
was the same as that between theory and history. This opposition
to theory of the largest body of students of social phenomena made
it appear as if the difference between the theoretical and the histori-

was a necessary consequence of the differences between
the objects of the natural and the social sciences; and the belief that
the search for general rules must be confined to the study of natural
phenomena, while in the study of the social world the historical
cal treatment

method must rule, became the foundation on which later historicism
grew up. But while historicism retained the claim for the pre-eminence of historical research in

this field,

it

almost reversed the

atti-

tude to history of the older historical school, and under the influence
of the scientistic currents of the age came to represent history as the
empirical study of society from which ultimately generalization would

emerge. History was to be the source from which a new science
would spring, a science which should at the same time be

of society

and yet produce what theoretical knowledge we could hope
to gain about society.
are here not concerned with the actual steps in that process of

historical

We

transition

from the older

historical school to the historicism of the

66

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE
be noticed that historicism in the sense in which

younger.

It

may

the term

is

used here, was created not by historians but by students

just

of the specialized social sciences, particularly economists, who hoped
thereby to gain an empirical road to the theory of their subject. But

development in detail and to show how the men responwere actually guided by the scientistic views of their
57
generation must be left to the later historical account.
The first point we must briefly consider is the nature of the distinction between the historical and the theoretical treatment of any
subject which in fact makes it a contradiction in terms to demand
to trace this
sible for

it

that history should become a theoretical science or that theory should
ever be "historical." If we understand that distinction, it will become
clear that it has no necessary connection with the difference of the
concrete objects with which the two methods of approach deal, and
that for the understanding of any concrete phenomenon, be it in

nature or in society, both kinds of knowledge are equally required.
That human history deals with events or situations which are

unique or singular when we consider all aspects which are relevant
for the answer of a particular question which we may ask about
is, of course, not peculiar to human history. It is equally true
of any attempt to explain a concrete phenomenon if we only take
into account a sufficient number of aspects
or, to put it differently,

them,

so long as we do not deliberately select only such aspects of reality
as fall within the sphere of any one of the systems of connected prop-

which we regard as distinct theoretical sciences. If I watch
and record the process by which a plot in my garden that I leave
untouched for months is gradually covered with weeds, I am describing a process which in all its detail is no less unique than any event
in human history. If I want to explain any particular configuration
of different plants which may appear at any stage of that process, I
can do so only by giving an account of all the relevant influences
which have affected different parts of my plot at different times. I
shall have to consider what I can find out about the differences of the
ositions

soil in different parts of the plot,

about differences in the radiation of

the sun, of moisture, of the air-currents, etc., etc.; and in order to
explain the effects of all these factors I shall have to use, apart from

the knowledge of

all

these particular facts, various parts of the theory

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

67

of physics, of chemistry, biology, meteorology, and so on. The result
of all this will be the explanation of a particular phenomenon, but

not a theoretical science of

In an instance like

how garden

plots are covered with weeds.
sequence of events, their

this the particular

causes and consequences, will probably not be of sufficient general
interest to make it worth while to produce a written account of them

or to develop their study into a distinct discipline. But there are large
fields of natural

which in

knowledge, represented by recognized disciplines,

their methodological character are

In geography,

e.g.,

and

no

different

from this.
and as-

at least in a large part of geology

we

are mainly concerned with particular situations, either
of the earth or of the universe; we aim at explaining a unique situation by showing how it has been produced by the operation of many

tronomy,

forces subject to the general laws studied by the theoretical sciences.
In the specific sense of a body of general rules in which the term

"science"

is

often used

58

these disciplines are not "sciences,"

i.e.,

they are not theoretical sciences but endeavors to apply the laws
found by the theoretical sciences to the explanation of particular
"historical" situations.

The distinction between the search for generic principles and the
explanation of concrete phenomena has thus no necessary connection
with the distinction between the study of nature and the study of soIn both fields we need generalizations in order to explain conand unique events. Whenever we attempt to explain or understand a particular phenomenon we can do so only by recognizing it
or its parts as members of certain classes of phenomena, and the ex-

ciety.

crete

planation of the particular

phenomenon presupposes

the existence of

general rules.

There are very good reasons, however, for a marked difference in
emphasis, reasons why, generally speaking, in the natural sciences
the search for general laws has the pride of place, with their application to particular events usually little discussed and of small

general interest, while with social

phenomena

the explanation of the

particular and unique situation is as important and often of much
greater interest than any generalization. In most natural sciences the
particular situation or event is generally one of a very large number
of similar events, which as particular events are only of local and

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

68

temporary interest and scarcely worth public discussion (except as
evidence of the truth of the general rule). The important thing for

them

is

the general law applicable to

all

the recurrent events of a par-

on the other hand, a particular or
often of such general interest and at the same time so

ticular kind. In the social field,

unique event

is

complex and so difficult to see in all its important aspects, that its
explanation and discussion constitute a major task requiring the
whole energy of a specialist. We study here particular events because
they have contributed to create the particular environment in which

we

or because they are part of that environment. The creation
and dissolution of the Roman Empire or the Crusades, the French
live

Revolution or the Growth of Modern Industry are such unique complexes of events, which have helped to produce the particular circumstances in which we live and whose explanation is therefore of
great interest.
It is necessary, however, to consider briefly the logical nature of
these singular or unique objects of study. Probably the majority of
the numerous disputes and confusions which have arisen in this con-

nection are due to the vagueness of the common notion of what can
one object of thought and particularly to the misconcep-

constitute

tion that the totality (i.e., all possible aspects) of a particular situation can ever constitute one single object of thought.
can touch

We

here only on a very few of the logical problems which this belief
raises.

The
all

first

point which

thought must be

to

we must remember is
some degree abstract.

that, strictly speaking,

We

have seen before

that all perception of reality, including the simplest sensations, involves a classification of the object according to some property or
properties. The same complex of
to discover within given temporal

phenomena which we may be able
and spatial limits may in this sense

be considered under many different aspects; and the principles according to which we classify or group the events may differ from
each other not merely in one but in several different ways. The various theoretical sciences deal only with those aspects of the phenomena which can be fitted into a single body of connected propositions. It is necessary to

emphasize that

this is

no

less true

oif

the

theoretical sciences of nature than of the theoretical sciences of so-

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

69

an alleged tendency of the natural sciences to deal with
the "whole" or the totality of the real things is often quoted by

ciety, since

writers inclined to historicism as a justification for doing the same in
the social field. 59 Any discipline of knowledge, whether theoretical or
historical,

however, can deal only with certain selected aspects of the

and in the theoretical sciences the principle of selection
the possibility of subsuming these aspects under a logically connected body of rules. The same thing may be for one science a pendulum, for another a lump of brass, and for a third a convex mirror.

real world;
is

We

have already seen that the fact that a pendulum possesses chemiand optical properties does not mean that in studying laws of
pendulums we must study them by the methods of chemistry and
cal

optics

though when we apply these laws to a particular pendulum
well have to take into account certain laws of chemistry or
Similarly, as has been pointed out, the fact that all social phe-

we may
optics.

physical properties does not mean that we must study
them by the methods of the physical sciences.
The selection of the aspects of a complex of phenomena which can
be explained by means of a connected body of rules is, however, not
the only method of selection or abstraction which the scientist will

nomena have

use. Where investigation is directed, not at establishing rules
of general applicability, but at answering a particular question raised
by the events in the world about him, he will have to select those fea-

have to

tures that are relevant to the particular question. The important point,
is that he still must select a limited number from the infinite

however,

phenomena which he can find at the given time and place.
may, in such cases, sometimes speak as if he considered the
"whole" situation as he finds it. But what we mean is not the inexhaustible totality of everything that can be observed within certain
spatio-temporal limits, but certain features thought to be relevant to
the question asked. If I ask why the weeds in my garden have grown

variety of

We

in this particular pattern

no

single theoretical science will provide the

answer. This, however, does not

mean

that to answer

iowe must

everything that can be known about the space-time interval in
which the phenomenon occurred. While the question we ask designates the phenomena to be explained, it is only by means of the laws

know

of the theoretical sciences that

we

are able to select the other phe-

70

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

nomena which

are relevant for its explanation. The object of scienstudy is never the totality of all the phenomena observable at a
given time and place, but always only certain selected aspects: and
according to the question we ask the same spatio-temporal situation
tific

may contain any number of different objects of study. The human
mind indeed can never grasp a "whole" in the sense of all the different aspects of a real situation.
The application of these considerations

to

the

phenomena

of

human

history leads to very important consequences. It means nothless
than that a historical process or period is never a single defiing
nite object of thought but becomes such only by the question we ask

about it; and that, according to the question we ask, what we are accustomed to regard as a single historical event can become any number of different objects of thought.
It is confusion on this point which is mainly responsible for the

now

much in vogue that all historical knowledge is necesdetermined by our "standpoint" and bound to change
with the lapse of time. 60 This view is a natural consequence of the
belief that the commonly used names for historical periods or com-

doctrine

so

sarily relative,

plexes of events, such as "the Napoleonic Wars," or "France during
the Revolution," or "the Commonwealth Period," stand for definitely
61
which are given to us in the same
given objects, unique individuals
manner as the natural units in which biological specimens or planets

present themselves. Those names of historical phenomena define
in fact little more than a period and a place and there is scarcely a
limit to the number of different questions which we can ask about
events which occurred during the period and within the region to
which they refer. It is only the question that we ask, however, which
will define our object; and there are, of course, many reasons why at
different times people will ask different questions about the same
62
But this does not mean that history will at different times
period.
and on the basis of the same information give different answers to the
same question. Only this, however, would entitle us to assert that
historical

about the

knowledge

is

relative.

The

kernel of truth in the assertion

relativity of historical knowledge is that historians will at
different times be interested in different objects, but not that they will
necessarily hold different views about the same object

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

We

must dwell a

little

71

longer on the nature of the "wholes" which
much of what we have to say is merely
been said before about the "wholes"

the historian studies, though
an application of what has

which some authors regard as objects of theoretical generalizations.
What we said then is just as true of the wholes which the historian

They are never given to him as wholes, but always reconby him from their elements which alone can be directly perceived. Whether he speaks about the government that existed or the
trade that was carried on, the army that moved, or the knowledge
that was preserved or disseminated, he is never referring to a constudies.

structed

stant collection of physical attributes that can
but always to a system of relationships between

be

directly observed,

some

of the observed

elements which can be merely inferred. Words like "government" or
"trade" or "army" or "knowledge" do not stand for single observable
things but for structures of relationships which can be described only
in terms of a schematic representation or "theory" of the persistent
03
These
system of relationships between the ever-changing elements.

"wholes," in other words, do not exist for us apart from the theory

by which we constitute them, apart from the mental technique by
which we can reconstruct the connections between the observed elements and follow up the implications of this particular combination.

The

place of theory in historical knowledge

constituting the wholes to

which history

is

refers;

thus in forming or
is prior to these

it

wholes which do not become

visible except by following up the syswhich connects the parts. The generalizations of
theory, however, do not refer, and cannot refer, as has been mistakenly believed by the older historians (who for that reason opposed

tem of

relations

theory), to the concrete wholes, the particular constellations of the
elements, with which history is concerned. The models of "wholes,"
of structural connections, which theory provides ready-made for the
historian to use (though even these are not the given elements about
which theory generalizes but the results of theoretical activity), are

not identical with the "wholes" which the historian considers. The
models provided by any one theoretical science of society consist
necessarily of elements of one kind, elements which are selected because their connection can be explained by a coherent body of principles and not because they help to answer a particular question about

72

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

concrete phenomena. For the latter purpose the historian will reguhave to use generalizations belonging to different theoretical

larly

spheres. His work, thus, as

true of all attempts to explain particuphenomena, presupposes theory; it is, as is all thinking about concrete phenomena, an application of generic concepts to the explanais

lar

tion of particular phenomena.
If the dependence of the historical study of social phenomena on
theory is not always recognized, this is mainly due to the very simple
nature of the majority of theoretical schemes which the historian will

employ and which brings it about that there will be no dispute about
the conclusions reached by their help, and little awareness that he has
used theoretical reasoning at all. But this does not alter the fact that
in their methodological character

and

validity the concepts of social

phenomena which the historian has to employ are essentially of the
same kind as the more elaborate models produced by the systematic
social sciences. All the unique objects of history which he studies are
in fact either constant patterns of relations, or repeatable processes
in which the elements are of a generic character. When the historian

speaks of a State or a battle, a town or a market, these words cover
coherent structures of individual phenomena which we can compre-

hend only by understanding the

intentions of the acting individuals.

speaks of a certain system, say the feudal system,
over
a
persisting
period of time, he means that a certain pattern of
a certain type of actions were regularly recontinued,
relationships
If the historian

peated, structures whose connection he can understand only by
tal reproduction of the individual attitudes of which they were

The unique wholes which the historian studies, in short,
64
as natural units of which he can
given to him as individuals,
up.

men-

made

are not
find out

by observation which features belong to them, but constructions
made by the kind of technique that is systematically developed by
the theoretical sciences of society. Whether he endeavors to give a
genetic account of how a particular institution arose, or a descriptive
account of how it functioned, he cannot do so except by a combination of generic considerations applying to the elements from which

the unique situation is composed. Though in this work of reconstruction he cannot use any elements except those he empirically finds, not
observation but only the "theoretical" work of reconstruction can tell

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH
him which among those

that

he can

73

find are part of a connected

whole.
Theoretical and historical

plementary

no

conflict

neither

is

work

activities. If their

of

task

are thus logically distinct but comis rightly understood, there can be

And though they have distinct tasks,
use without the other. But this does not alter the

between them.

much

can theory be historical nor history theoretical.
is of interest only because it explains the parThough
and
the
ticular,
though
particular can be explained only in generic
the
can
never be the general and the general never
terms,
particular
the particular. The unfortunate misunderstandings that have arisen
between historians and theorists are largely due to the name "historical school" which has been usurped by the mongrel view better described as historicism and which is indeed neither history nor
fact that neither

the general

theory.

The naive view which regards the complexes which history studies
as given wholes naturally leads to the belief that their observation can
reveal "laws" of the development of these wholes. This belief is one
of the most characteristic features of that scientistic history which
under the name of historicism was trying to find an empirical basis
for a theory of history or (using the term philosophy in its old sense
equivalent to "theory") a "philosophy of history," and to establish

necessary successions of definite "stages" or "phases," "systems" or
"styles," following each other in historical development. This view

on the one hand endeavors

to find laws

where

in the nature of the

case they cannot be found, in the succession of the unique and singular historical phenomena, and on the other hand denies the possibility
of the kind of theory which alone can help us to understand unique
wholes, the theory which shows the different ways in which the familiar elements can be

we

combined

find in the real world.

The

produce the unique combinations
empiricist prejudice thus led to an into

version of the only procedure by which we can comprehend historical
wholes, their reconstruction from the parts; it induced scholars to
treat as if they were objective facts vague conceptions of wholes

which were merely intuitively comprehended; and it finally produced
the view that the elements which are the only thing that we can di-

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

74

rectly

on
to

comprehend and from which we must reconstruct the wholes,
from the whole, which had

the contrary, could be understood only

be known before we could understand
The belief that human history, which is

the elements.
the result of the interaction

human minds, must yet be subject to simple laws
human minds is now so widely held that few people are

of innumerable
accessible to

aware what an astonishing claim it really implies. Instead of
working patiently at the humble task of rebuilding from the directly
known elements the complex and unique structures which we find in
the world, and of tracing from the changes in the relations between
the elements the changes in the wholes, the authors of these pseudotheories of history pretend to be able to arrive by a kind of mental
short cut at a direct insight into the laws of succession of the immediat all

ately

apprehended wholes. However doubtful

their status, these theo-

of development have achieved a hold on public imagination
much greater than any of the results of genuine systematic study.
ries

65
of history (or "historical theories")
"Philosophies" or "theories"
have indeed become the characteristic feature, the "darling vice" 66

From Hegel and Comte, and particularly Marx,
Sombart and Spengler these spurious theories came to be
regarded as representative results of social science; and through the
belief that one kind of "system" must as a matter of historical necessity be superseded by a new and different "system," they have even
exercised a profound influence on social evolution. This they
achieved mainly because they looked like the kind of laws which the
natural sciences produced; and in an age when these sciences set the
standard by which all intellectual effort was measured, the claim of
these theories of history to be able to predict future developments
was regarded as evidence of their pre-eminently scientific character.
Though merely one among many characteristic 19th century products
of the 19th century.

down

to

of this kind,

Marxism more than any

of the others has

become

the

vehicle through which this result of scientism has gained so wide an
influence that many of the opponents of Marxism equally with its adherents are thinking in its terms.

Apart from setting up a new ideal this development had, however,
also the negative effect of discrediting the existing theory on which
past understanding of social phenomena had been based. Since it was

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

75

supposed that we could directly observe the changes in the whole of
any particular changed social phenomenon, and that
everything within the whole must necessarily change with it, it was
concluded that there could be no timeless generalizations about the
elements from which these wholes were built up, no universal theories about the ways in which they might be combined into wholes. All
society or of

social theory, it was said, was necessarily historical, zeitgebunden,
true only of particular historical "phases" or "systems."
All concepts of individual phenomena, according to this strict his-

be regarded as merely historical categories, valid only
in a particular historical context.
price in the 12th century or a
the
of
it is argued, is not the same
in
400
B.C.,
monopoly
Egypt

toricism, are to

A

"thing" as a price or a monopoly today, and any attempt to explain
that price or the policy of that monopolist by the same theory which
we would use to explain a price or a monopoly of today is therefore

vain and bound to

fail.

This argument

is

apprehension of the function of theory.

was charged

based on a complete miscourse, if we ask why a

Of

a particular date, or why a monopolist then acted in a particular manner, this is a historical question
which cannot be fully answered by any one theoretical discipline; to
particular price

answer

it

we must

at

take into account the particular circumstances of

time and place. But this does not

mean

that

we must

not, in selecting

the factors relevant to the explanation of the particular price, etc.,
use precisely the same theoretical reasoning as we would with regard
to a price of today.

What

this

contention overlooks

is

that "price" or

"monopoly" are

not names for definite "things," fixed collections of physical attributes

which we recognize by some of these attributes as members of the
same class and whose further attributes we ascertain by observation;
but that they are objects which can be defined only in terms of certain relations between human beings and which cannot possess any
attributes except those which follow from the relations by which
they are defined. They can be recognized by us as prices or monopolies only because, and in so far as, we can recognize these individual
attitudes, and from these as elements compose the structural pattern
which we call a price or monopoly. Of course the "whole" situation,
or even the "whole" of the men who act, will greatly differ from place

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

76

to place and from time to time. But it is solely our capacity to recognize the familiar elements from which the unique situation is made

up which enables us

to attach

any meaning to the phenomena. Either

we cannot

thus recognize the meaning of the individual actions, they
are nothing but physical facts to us, the handing over of certain ma-

or

terial things, etc.,

we must

place them in the mental categories

familiar to us but not definable in physical terms. If the first contention were true this would mean that we could not know the facts of
all, because in that case we could not understand the documents from which we derive all knowledge of them. 67
Consistently pursued historicism necessarily leads to the view that

the past at

human mind

variable and that not only are most or all
unintelligible to us apart from
their historical setting, but that from our knowledge of how the whole
situations succeed each other we can learn to recognize the laws ac-

the

is itself

manifestations of the

human mind

cording to which the human mind changes, and that it is the knowledge of these laws which alone puts us in a position to understand

any particular manifestation of the human mind. Historicism, because
of

its

bility

refusal to recognize a compositive theory of universal applicahow different configurations of the same elements

unable to see

altogether different complexes, and unable, for the
same reason, to comprehend how the wholes can ever be anything
but what the human mind consciously designed, was bound to seek

may produce

the cause of the changes in the social structures in changes of the
itself
changes which it claims to understand and ex-

human mind

from changes in the directly apprehended wholes. From the extreme assertion of some sociologists that logic itself is variable, and

plain

the belief in the "pre-logical" character of the thinking of primitive
people, to the more sophisticated contentions of the modern "soci-

ology of knowledge," this approach has become one of the most
modern sociology. It has raised the old

characteristic features of

question of the "constancy of the human mind" in a
form than has ever been done before.

more

radical

This phrase is, of course, so vague that any dispute about it without giving it further precision is futile. That not only any human individual in its historically given complexity, but also certain types pre-

dominant

in particular ages or localities, differ in significant respects

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH
from other individuals or types

77

of course, beyond dispute. But this
we should be able to recog-

is,

does not alter the fact that in order that
nize or understand

them

at all as

human

be certain invariable features present.
in the abstract.

When we

beings or minds, there must

We

cannot recognize "mind"

mind what we mean is tljat
interpreted on the analogy

speak of

certain

of our
phenomena can be successfully
own mind, that the use of the familiar categories of our own thinking
provides a satisfactory working explanation of what we observe. But
this means that to recognize something as mind is to recognize it as
something similar to our own mind, and that the possibility of recognizing mind is limited to what is similar to our own mind. To speak
of a mind with a structure fundamentally different from our own, or
to claim that we can observe changes in the basic structure of the
human mind is not only to claim what is impossible: it is a meaningless statement. Whether the human mind is in this sense constant can
never become a problem because to recognize mind cannot mean

anything but to recognize something as operating in the same

way

as

own thinking.
To recognize the existence of a mind always implies that we add
something to what we perceive with our senses, that we interpret the
phenomena in the light of our own mind, or find that they fit into the
ready pattern of our own thinking. This kind of interpretation of
human actions may not be always successful, and, what is even more
embarrassing, we may never be absolutely certain that it is correct in
any particular case; all we know is that it works in the overwhelming
number of cases. Yet it is the only basis on which we ever understand
what we call other people's intentions, or the meaning of their ac-

our

tions;

and

since this

certainly the only basis of all our historical knowledge
derived from the understanding of signs or documents.

is all

As we pass from men of our own kind to different types of beings
we may, of course, find that what we can thus understand becomes
less and less. And we cannot exclude the possibility that one day we
though perhaps physically resembling men, beis entirely unintelligible to us. With regard to
indeed
be reduced to the "objective" study which the
them we should
behaviorists want us to adopt towards men in general. But there
would be no sense in ascribing to these beings a mind different from

find beings who,
have in a way which

may

78

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

our own. We should know nothing of them which we could call mind,
we should indeed know nothing about them but physical facts. Any
interpretation of their actions in terms of such categories as intention

or purpose, sensation or

will,

would be meaningless.

A

which we can intelligibly speak must be like our own.
The whole idea of the variability of the human mind

is

mind about
a direct re-

an object which we observe
as we observe physical facts. The sole difference between mind and
physical objects, however, which entitles us to speak of mind at all,
is precisely that wherever we speak of mind we interpret what we
observe in terms of categories which we know only because they are
the categories in which our own mind operates. There is nothing
paradoxical in the claim that all mind must run in terms of certain
universal categories of thought, because where we speak of mind this
means that we can successfully interpret what we observe by arranging it in these categories. And anything which can be comprehended
through our understanding of other minds, anything which we recognize as specifically human, must be comprehensible in terms of these
sult of the

erroneous belief that mind

is

categories.

Through

the theory of the variability of the

human mind,

to

which

the consistent development of historicism leads, it cuts, in effect, the
ground under its own feet: it is led to the self-contradictory position

of generalizing about facts which, if the theory were true, could not
be known. If the human mind were really variable so that, as the ex-

treme adherents of historicism

assert,

we could not

directly under-

stand what people of other ages meant by a particular statement,
history would be inaccessible to us. The wholes from which we are

supposed to understand the elements would never become visible to
And even if we disregard this fundamental difficulty created by
the impossibility of understanding the documents from which we de-

us.

rive all historical knowledge, without first understanding the individual actions and intentions the historian could never combine them

into wholes

and never

would, as indeed

explicitly state

what these wholes

are.

He

many of the adherents of historicism,
be reduced to talking about "wholes" which are intuitively comprehended, to making uncertain and vague generalizations about "styles"
is

true of so

or "systems" whose character could not be precisely defined.
It follows indeed from the nature of the evidence on which

all

our

THE HISTORICISM OF THE SCIENTISTIC APPROACH

79

based that history can never carry us beyond
the working of the minds of the
acting people because they are similar to our own. Where we cease
to understand, where we can no longer recognize categories of thought
similar to those in terms of which we think, history ceases to be

historical

knowledge

the stage where

is

we can understand

history. And precisely at that point, and only at that point, do
the general theories of the social sciences cease to be valid. Since
history and social theory are based on the same knowledge of the

human

working of the human mind, the same capacity to understand other
people, their range and scope is necessarily co-terminous. Particular
propositions of social theory may have no application at certain
times, because the combination of elements to which they refer to do
not occur. 68 But they remain nevertheless true. There can be no different theories for different ages, though at some times certain parts
and at others different parts of the same body of theory may be re-

quired to explain the observed facts, just as, e.g., generalizations
about the effect of very low temperatures on vegetation may be irrelevant in the tropics but still true. Any true theoretical statement of
the social sciences will cease to be valid only where history ceases to
be human history. If we conceive of somebody observing and record-

ing the doings of another race, unintelligible to him and to us, his
records would in a sense be history, such as, e.g., the history of an antheap. Such history would have to be written in purely objective,

physical terms. It would be the sort of history which corresponds to
the positivist ideal, such as the proverbial observer from another

planet might write of the human race. But such history could not help
us to understand any of the events recorded by it in the sense in

which we understand human

history.

When we

speak of man we necessarily imply the presence of certain familiar mental categories. It is not the lumps of flesh of a cer-

which we mean, nor any units performing definite funcwhich we could define in physical terms. The completely insane,
none of whose actions we can understand, is not a man to us he
tain shape
tions

could not figure in

human

history except as the object of other peoto one

and thinking. When we speak of man we refer
whose actions we can understand. As old Democritus said
ple's acting

fivQ(OJtog lativ 6 ndvtec;

VIII
"PURPOSIVE" SOCIAL FORMATIONS

IN THE CONCLUDING portions of this essay we have to consider certain practical attitudes which spring from the theoretical views already discussed. Their most characteristic common feature is a direct
result of the inability, caused by the lack of a compositive theory of
social phenomena, to grasp how the independent action of many men
can produce coherent wholes, persistent structures of relationships
which serve important human purposes without having been designed

for that end. This produces a "pragmatic" 70 interpretation of social
institutions which treats all social structures which serve human pur-

poses as the result of deliberate design and which denies the possibility of an orderly or purposeful arrangement in anything which is

not thus constructed.
This view receives strong support from the fear of employing any

anthropomorphic conceptions which is so characteristic of the scientistic attitude. This fear has produced an almost complete ban on the
use of the concept of "purpose" in the discussion of spontaneous

and

often drives positivists into an error similar to
that they wish to avoid: having learnt that it is erroneous to regard
everything that behaves in an apparently purposive manner as cresocial growths,

it

ated by a designing mind, they are led to believe that no result of the
action of many men can show order or serve a useful purpose unless
the result of deliberate design. They are thus driven back to a
is essentially the same as that which, till the eighteenth
made
man think of language or the family as having been
century,
it is

view which

"invented," or the state as having been created by an explicit social
contract, and in opposition to which the compositive theories of
social structures

80

were developed.

81

As the terms of ordinary language are somewhat misleading, it is
necessary to move with great care in any discussion of the "purposive" character of spontaneous social formations. The risk of being
lured into an illegitimate anthropomorphic use of the term purpose
is as great as that of denying that the term purpose in this connection
designates something of importance. In

its

strict original

meaning

"purpose" indeed presupposes an acting person deliberately aiming
at a result. The same, however, as we have seen before, 71 is true of
other concepts like "law" or "organization," which we have neverthe-

been forced, by the lack of other suitable terms, to adopt for sciuse in a non-anthropomorphic sense. In the same way we may
find the term "purpose" indispensable in a carefully defined sense.
The character of the problem may usefully be described first in the
words of an eminent contemporary philosopher who, though elsewhere, in the strict positivist manner, he declares that "the concept
of purpose must be entirely excluded from the scientific treatment of
less

entific

the

phenomena

of life," yet admits the existence of "a general prin-

ciple which proves frequently valid in psychology and biology and
also elsewhere: namely that the result of unconscious or instinctive
is frequently exactly the same as would have arisen from
rational calculation." 72 This states one aspect of the problem very
clearly: namely, that a result which, if it were deliberately aimed at,

processes

could be achieved only in a limited number of ways, may actually be
achieved by one of those methods, although nobody has consciously

aimed

at

it.

But

it still

leaves

open the question why the particular

brought about in this manner should be regarded as
above
others and therefore deserve to be described as
distinguished
result

which

is

the "purpose."

we

we are constantly tempted
as
"purposive" though they are not directed
phenomena
a conscious mind, it becomes rapidly clear that the "end" or "pur-

If

survey the different fields in which

to describe

by

pose" they are said to serve is always the preservation of a "whole,"
of a persistent structure of relationships, whose existence we have
come to take for granted before we understood the nature of the
mechanism which holds the parts together. The most familiar instances of such wholes are the biological organisms. Here the conception of the "function" of an organ as an essential condition for

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

82

the persistence of the whole has proved to be of the greatest heuristic
value. It is easily seen how paralyzing an effect on research it would
have had if the scientific prejudice had effectively banned the use of
all teleological

of a
tion"

it

serves. 78

Though

in the social sphere

we meet

them

with

phenomena which

in this

of course, dangerous to defor that reason as organisms. The limited analogy pro-

respect raise analogous problems,
scribe

e.g., prevented the discoverer
asking what "purpose" or "func-

concepts in biology and,

new organ from immediately

vides as such

no answer

to the

it is,

common

problem, and the loan of an

alien term tends to obscure the equally important differences.

need not labor further the

now familiar fact that the social wholes,

We
un-

not given to us as natural units,
fixed complexes which ordinary experience shows us to belong together, but are recognizable only by a process of mental reconstruclike the biological organisms, are

tion; or that the parts of the social whole, unlike those of

a true

organism, can exist away from their particular place in the whole
and are to a large extent mobile and exchangeable. Yet, though we
must avoid overworking the analogy, certain general considerations
apply in both cases. As in the biological organisms we often observe
in spontaneous social formations that the parts move as if their purpose were the preservation of the wholes. We find again and again
that if it were somebody's deliberate aim to preserve the structure of

those wholes, and

//

do

it

would have

to

he had knowledge and the power to do so, he
by causing precisely those movements which in

fact are taking place without

any such conscious direction.

In the social sphere these spontaneous movements which preserve
a certain structural connection between the parts are, moreover, connected in a special way with our individual purposes: the social

wholes which are thus maintained are the condition for the achieve-

ment of many of the things at which we as individuals aim, the environment which makes it possible even to conceive of most of our
individual desires and which gives us the power to achieve them.
There is nothing more mysterious in the fact that, e.g., money or

man to achieve things which he desires, alwere
not
though they
designed for that purpose, and hardly could
have been consciously designed before that growth of civilization
the price system enable

"PURPOSIVE" SOCIAL FORMATIONS

83

which they made possible, than that, unless man had tumbled upon
these devices, he would not have achieved the powers he has gained.
The facts to which we refer when we speak of "purposive" forces
being at work here, are the same as those which create the persistent
social structures which we have come to take for granted and which
form the conditions of our existence. The spontaneously grown institutions are "useful" because they were the conditions on which the
further development of man was based
which gave him the powers
which he used. If, in the form in which Adam Smith put it, the
phrase that man in society "constantly promotes ends which are no
part of his intention" has become the constant source of irritation of
the scientistically-minded,
lem of the social sciences.

it

describes nevertheless the central prob-

As

it

was put a hundred years

after

Smith

by Carl Menger, who did more than any other writer to carry beyond
Smith the elucidation of the meaning of this phrase, the question
"how it is possible that institutions which serve the common welfare
and are most important for its advancement can arise without a com-

mon

will

aiming at their creation"

is

still

"the significant, perhaps

most significant, problem of the social sciences." 74
That the nature and even the existence of this problem

the

little

recognized

75

is

is still

so

closely connected with a common confusion
when we say that human institutions are made

about what we mean
by man. Though in a sense man-made, i.e., entirely the result of
human actions, they may yet not be designed, not be the intended
product of these actions. The term institution

itself is

rather mislead-

ing in this respect, as it suggests something deliberately instituted. It
would probably be better if this term were confined to particular contrivances, like particular laws and organizations, which have been
created for a specific purpose, and if a more neutral term like "formations" (in a sense similar to that in which the geologists use it, and

corresponding to the German Gebilde) could be used for those phenomena, which, like money or language, have not been so created.
From the belief that nothing which has not been consciously designed can be useful or even essential to the achievement of

human

an easy transition to the belief that since all "institupurposes,
been
made by man, we must have complete power to retions" have
fashion them in any way we desire. 76 But, though this conclusion at
it is

84

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

sounds like a self-evident commonplace, it is, in fact, a complete
non sequitur, based on the equivocal use of the term "institution."
It would be valid only if all the "purposive" formations were the result of design. But phenomena like language or the market, money
first

or morals, are not real artifacts, products of deliberate creation. 77
Not only have they not been designed by any mind, but they are also
preserved by, and depend for their functioning on, the actions of people who are not guided by the desire to keep them in existence. And,
as they are not

do not now

due

to design

control,

we

but rest on individual actions which

at least

can not take

it

for granted that

we
we

can improve upon, or even equal, their performance by any organization which relies

on

the deliberate control of the

movements of

its

parts. In so far as we learn to understand the spontaneous forces, we
may hope to use them and modify their operations by proper adjust-

ment of the

institutions which form part of the larger process. But
the difference between thus utilizing and influencing spontaneous processes and an attempt to replace them by an organization

there

which

is all

on conscious

relies

We

control.

ourselves undeservedly if we represent human civilizaas
tion
entirely the product of conscious reason or as the product of
flatter

human

design, or when we assume that it is necessarily in our power
deliberately to re-create or to maintain what we have built without
knowing what we were doing. Though our civilization is the result of

a cumulation of individual knowledge, it is not by the explicit or conscious combination of all this knowledge in any individual brain, but
its embodiment in symbols which we use without understanding
78
them, in habits and institutions, tools and concepts, that man in society is constantly able to profit from a body of knowledge neither he

by

nor any other man completely possesses. Many of the greatest things
man has achieved are not the result of consciously directed thought,
and still less the product of a deliberately co-ordinated effort of many
individuals, but of a process in which the individual plays a part
which he can never fully understand. They are greater than any individual precisely because they result from the combination of knowledge more extensive than a single mind can master.
It has been unfortunate that those who have recognized this so
often

draw

the conclusion that the problems

it

raises are purely his-

"PURPOSIVE" SOCIAL FORMATIONS

85

problems, and thereby deprive themselves of the means of effectively refuting the views they try to combat. In fact, as we have
torical

seen,

79

much

of the older "historical school"

was

essentially a re-

action against the type of erroneous rationalism we are discussing. If
it failed it was because it treated the problem of explaining these
phenomena as entirely one of the accidents of time and place and re-

fused systematically to elaborate the logical process by which alone
we can provide an explanation. We need not return here to this point
80
already discussed.
Though the explanation of the way in which the
parts of the social whole depend upon each other will often take the
form of a genetic account, this will be at most "schematic history"
which the true historian will rightly refuse to recognize as real history. It will deal, not with the particular circumstances of

an

indi-

vidual process, but only with those steps which are essential to produce a particular result, with a process which, at least in principle,

may be

repeated elsewhere or at different times.

planations,

it

must run

in generic terms,

it

As

is

true of all ex-

will deal with

what

is

sometimes called the "logic of events," neglect much that is important in the unique historical instance, and be concerned with a de-

pendence of the parts of the phenomenon upon each other which is
not even necessarily the same as the chronological order in which
they appeared. In short,

it

is

not history, but compositive social

theory.

One
that

curious aspect of this problem which is rarely appreciated is
only by the individualist or compositive method that we can

it is

meaning to the much abused phrases about the social
and
formations being in any sense "more" than "merely
processes
the sum" of their parts, and that we are enabled to understand how
structures of interpersonal relationships emerge, which make it posgive a definite

sible for the joint efforts of individuals to achieve desirable results

which no individual could have planned or foreseen. The collectivist,
on the other hand, who refuses to account for the wholes by systematically following up the interactions of individual efforts, and who
claims to be able directly to comprehend social wholes as such, is
never able to define the precise character of these wholes or their
mode of operation, and is regularly driven to conceive of these
wholes on the model of an individual mind.

86

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE
Even more

theories
ciety is

significant of the inherent

weakness of the

collectivist

the extraordinary paradox that from the assertion that soin some sense "more" than merely the aggregate of all indiis

viduals their adherents regularly pass by a sort of intellectual somersault to the thesis that in order that the coherence of this larger entity

be safeguarded it must be subjected to conscious control, i.e., to the
control of what in the last resort must be an individual mind. It thus

comes about

that in practice

it is

regularly the theoretical collectivist

who extols individual reason and demands that all forces of society
be made subject to the direction of a single mastermind, while it is
the individualist who recognizes the limitations of the powers of individual reason and consequently advocates freedom as a

means

for

the fullest development of the powers of the inter-individual process.

IX
"CONSCIOUS'' DIRECTION

AND THE GROWTH

OF REASON
THE UNIVERSAL DEMAND

for "conscious" control or direction of so-

one of the most characteristic features of our generation. It expresses perhaps more clearly than any of its other
cliches the peculiar spirit of the age. That anything is not consciously
directed as a whole is regarded as itself a blemish, a proof of its irrationality and of the need completely to replace it by a deliberately
designed mechanism. Yet few of the people who use the term "conscious" so freely seem to be aware precisely what it means; most people seem to forget that "conscious" and "deliberate" are terms which
have meaning only when applied to individuals, and that the demand
cial processes is

is therefore equivalent to the demand for cona
mind.
by single
This belief that processes which are consciously directed are neces-

for conscious control
trol

any spontaneous process is an unfounded superstiwould be truer to say, as A. N. Whitehead has argued in
another connection, that on the contrary "civilization advances by
sarily superior to
tion. It

extending the number of important operations we can perform without thinking about them." 81 If it is true that the spontaneous inter-

play of social forces sometimes solves problems no individual mind
could consciously solve, or perhaps even perceives, and if they
thereby create an ordered structure which increases the power of the
individuals without having been designed by any one of them, they
are superior to conscious action. Indeed, any social processes which
deserve to be called "social" in distinction to the action of individuals

are almost ex definitione not conscious. In so far as such processes
are capable of producing a useful order which could not have been
87

88

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

produced by conscious, direction, any attempt to make them subject
to such direction would necessarily mean that we restrict what social
82
activity can achieve to the inferior capacity of the individual mind.

The

full significance of this

demand

for universal conscious con-

be seen most clearly if we consider it first in its most ambitious manifestation, even though this is as yet merely a vague aspiration and important mainly as a symptom: this is the application of
the demand for conscious control to the growth of the human mind
itself. This audacious idea is the most extreme result to which man
has yet been led by the success of reason in the conquest of external
nature. It has become a characteristic feature of contemporary
thought and appears in what on a first view seem to be altogether diftrol will

and even opposite systems of ideas. Whether it is the late L. T.
Hobhouse who holds up to us "the ideal of a collective humanity selfferent

determining in

and the

final

its progress as the supreme object of human activity
standard by which the laws of conduct should be

83 or
Dr. Joseph Needham who argues that "the more conjudged,"
trol consciousness has over human affairs, the more truly human and

hence super-human man will become," 84 whether it is the strict followers of Hegel who adumbrate the master's view of Reason becoming conscious of itself and taking control of its fate, or Dr. Karl
Mannheim who thinks that "man's thought has become more spontaneous and absolute than

it

ever was, since

it

now

85
the basic attitude
possibility of determining itself,"

perceives the
is the same.

Though, according as these doctrines spring from Hegelian or positivist views, those who hold them form distinct groups who mutually
regard themselves as completely different from and greatly superior
to the other, the

common

idea that the

human mind

to pull itself up by its own boot-straps, springs
approach: the belief that by studying human

is,

as

it

were,

from the same general
Reason from the outside and as a whole we can grasp the laws of its motion in a more
complete and comprehensive manner than by its patient exploration
from the inside, by actually following up the processes in which individual minds interact.
This pretension to be able to increase the powers of the human
mind by consciously controlling its growth is thus based on the
same theoretical view which claims to be able fully to explain this

"CONSCIOUS" DIRECTION AND THE

GROWTH OF REASON

89

growth, a claim which implies the possession of a kind of supermind on the part of those who make it; and it is no accident that
those who hold these theoretical views should also wish to see the
growth of mind thus directed.
It is important to understand the precise sense in which the claim
to be able to "explain" existing knowledge and beliefs must be

on it. For this
would
not
be
sufficient
if
we
purpose
possessed an adequate
which
the
on
which
the processes operate
principles
theory
explained
to which the growth of mind is due. Such knowledge of the mere
interpreted in order to justify the aspirations based
it

principles (either a theory of

knowledge or a theory of the

social

will assist in creating conditions favorable to

processes involved)
that growth, but could never provide a justification for the claim
that it should be deliberately directed. This claim presupposes that

we

are able to arrive at a substantive explanation of why
we hold, of how our actual knowledge

the particular views

mined by specific conditions. It is
knowledge" and the various other

this

we hold
is

deter-

which the "sociology of

derivatives

of the "materialist

interpretation of history" undertake when, e.g., they "explain" the
Kantian philosophy as the product of the material interests of the

German bourgeoisie in the late 18th century, or whatever other
similar theses they present.
cannot enter here into a discussion of the reasons why even

We

with respect to views now regarded as errors, and which on the basis
of our better present knowledge we may in a sense be able to explain,
really provide an explanation. The crucial
that
to
point
attempt this with respect to our present knowledge
involves a contradiction: if we knew how our present knowledge

that

method does not
is

is

conditioned or determined,

it

would no longer be our present

knowledge. To assert that we can explain our own knowledge is
assert that we know more than we do know, a statement which

to
is

80
meaning of that term. There may, perhaps,
be sense in the statement that to a greatly superior mind our present

non-sense in the

strict

knowledge would appear as

manner by

"relative," or as conditioned in a certain

assignable circumstances. But the only conclusion

should be entitled to draw from

this

we

would be one opposite to that
it would be that

of the "boot-strap theory of mental evolution":

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

90

on the

basis of our present

knowledge we are not in a position
draw any other conclusion

successfully to direct its growth. To
than this, to derive from the thesis that

by circumstances the claim
determine these

beliefs,

that

human

beliefs are

determined

somebody should be given power

to

who are to
Those who hold

involves the claim that those

assume that power possess some sort of super-mind.
these views have indeed regularly some special theory which exempts
their own views from the same sort of explanation and which credits
them, as a specially favored class, or simply as the "free-floating
intelligentsia," with the possession of absolute knowledge.
While in a sense this movement represents thus a sort of super-

demand

for the direction of everything by a supersame
time the ground for a thorough irrationmind,
alism. If truth is no longer discovered by observation, reasoning and
argument, but by uncovering hidden causes which, unknown to the

rationalism, a
it

thinker,
is

prepares at the

have determined his conclusions,

true or false

tests,

is

no longer decided by

logical

if

whether a statement

argument and empirical

but by examining the social position of the person

when

who made

becomes the membership of a class or
race which secures or prevents the achievement of truth, and when
in the end it is claimed that the sure instinct of a particular class or
a people is always right, reason has been finally driven out. 8T This is
no more than the natural result of a doctrine which starts out with
the claim that it can intuitively recognize wholes in a manner superior
it,

to

the

in

consequence

rational

it

reconstruction

attempted

by compositive

social

theory.
If it is true, moreover, as in their different ways both individualists
and collectivism contend, that social processes can achieve things
which it is beyond the power of the individual mind to achieve and
plan, and that it is from those social processes that the individual
mind derives what power it possesses, the attempt to impose conscious control on these processes must have even more fatal conse-

quences.
its

The presumptuous

own growth

aspiration that "reason" should direct

could in practice only have the effect that

own

it

would

growth, that it would confine itself to the results
which the directing individual mind can already foresee. Though
this aspiration is a direct outcome of a certain brand of rationalism,
set limits to its

"CONSCIOUS" DIRECTION AND THE

GROWTH OF REASON

91

of course, the result of a misunderstood or misapplied rationalism which fails to recognize the extent to which individual reason
is a product of inter-individual relationships. Indeed, the demand

it is,

that everything, including the growth of the human mind, should be
consciously controlled is itself a sign of the inadequate understanding
of the general character of the forces which constitutes the life of

the

human mind and

of

human

society. It is the

these self-destructive forces of our

modern

extreme stage of

"scientific'' civilization,

of that abuse of reason whose development and consequences will be
the central theme of the following historical studies.

human mind presents in its most
form
common
the
general
problem of all the social sciences that it
is here that minds most sharply divide, and that two fundamentally
different and irreconcilable attitudes manifest themselves: on the one
hand the essential humility of individualism, which endeavors to
understand as well as possible the principles by which the efforts of
individual men have in fact been combined to produce our civilization, and which from this understanding hopes to derive the power
to create conditions favorable to further growth; and, on the other
hand, the hubris of collectivism which aims at conscious direction
It is

of

all

because the growth of the

forces of society.
individualist approach,

The

in

awareness of the constitutional

limitations of the individual mind, 88 attempts to show how man in
society is able, by the use of various resultants of the social process,
to increase his powers with the help of the knowledge implicit in

them and of which he

is

never aware;

it

makes us understand

that

the only "reason" which can in any sense be regarded as superior
to individual reason does not exist apart from the inter-individual

process in which, by means of impersonal media, the knowledge of
successive generations and of millions of people living simultaneously is combined and mutually adjusted, and that this process is
the only form in which the totality of human knowledge ever exists.

The

method, on the other hand, not satisfied with
the partial knowledge of this process from the inside, which is all the
individual can gain, bases its demands for conscious control on the
assumption that it can comprehend this process as a whole and make
use of all knowledge in a systematically integrated form. It leads
collectivist

92

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

thus directly to political collectivism; and though logically methodoand political collectivism are distinct, it is not difficult to see

logical

how

the former leads to the latter and how, indeed, without methodo-

logical collectivism political collectivism would be deprived of its
intellectual basis: without the pretension that conscious individual
all the aims and all the knowledge of "society" or
the
belief
that these aims are best achieved by conscious
"humanity,"
central direction loses its foundation. Consistently pursued it must
lead to a system in which all members of society become merely

reason can grasp

instruments of the single directing mind and in which all the spontaneous social forces to which the growth of the mind is due are
destroyed.

89

indeed prove to be far the most difficult and not the least
important task for human reason rationally to comprehend its own
limitations. It is essential for the growth of reason that as individuals
It

may

we should bow

to forces and obey principles which we cannot hope
to
understand, yet on which the advance and even the preserfully
vation of civilization depends. 90 Historically this has been achieved

by the influence of the various religious creeds and by traditions
and superstitions which made men submit to those forces by an
appeal to his emotions rather than to his reason. The most dangerous
stage in the growth of civilization may well be that in which man has
come to regard all these beliefs as superstitions and refuses to accept
or to submit to anything which he does not rationally understand.
The rationalist whose reason is not sufficient to teach him those
limitations of the powers of conscious reason, and who despises
all the institutions and customs which have not been consciously
designed, would thus become the destroyer of the civilization built
upon them. This may well prove a hurdle which man will repeatedly
reach, only to be thrown back into barbarism.
It would lead too far here to refer more than briefly to another
field in which this same characteristic tendency of our age shows
itself: that of morals. Here it is against the observance of any general
and formal rules whose rationale is not explicitly demonstrated
that the same kind of objections are raised. But the demand that
every action should be judged after full consideration of all its
consequences and not by any general rules is due to a failure to see

"CONSCIOUS" DIRECTION AND THE

GROWTH OF REASON

93

that the submission to general rules, couched in terms of immediately
ascertainable circumstances, is the only way in which for man with
his limited knowledge freedom can be combined with the essential

minimum degree of order. Common acceptance of formal rules is
indeed the only alternative to direction by a single will man has
yet discovered. The general acceptance of such a body of rules
is

no

less

structed. It

important because they have not been rationally conis at least doubtful whether it would be possible in this

new moral code that would have any chance of
But
so
acceptance.
long as we have not succeeded in doing so, any
refusal
to
general
accept existing moral rules merely because their
has
not
been rationally demonstrated (as distinguished
expediency
from the case when the critic believes he has discovered a better
moral rule in a particular instance and is willing to brave public
disapproval in testing it) is to destroy one of the roots of our
way

to construct a

civilization. 91

X

ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS

THE

IDEAL OF conscious control of social phenomena has

made

its

economic field. The present popularity
of "economic planning" is directly traceable to the prevalence of the
scientistic ideas we have been discussing. As in this field the scientistic
greatest influence felt in the

ideals manifest themselves in the particular forms which they take
in the hands of the applied scientist and especially the engineer, it
will

be convenient to combine the discussion of

this influence

with

We

some examination of the

characteristic ideals of the engineers.
shall see that the influence on current views about problems of social

organization of his technological approach, or the engineering point
of view, is much greater than is generally realized. Most of the
schemes for a complete remodelling of society, from the earlier
Utopias to

modern

socialism, bear indeed the distinct

influence. In recent years

this desire to

mark

of this

apply engineering technique

M

to the solution of social problems has become very explicit;
"political engineering" and "social engineering" have become fashionable

catchwords which are quite as characteristic of the outlook of the
present generation as its predilection for "conscious" control; in
artists appear to pride themselves on the name of
of
the soul," bestowed upon them by Stalin. These phrases
"engineers
suggest a confusion about the fundamental differences between the

Russia even the

task of the engineer
scale

which make

more

We

it

and that of

social organizations

on a larger
somewhat

desirable to consider their character

fully.

must confine ourselves here to a few salient features of the
specific problems which the professional experience of the engineer
constantly bring up and which determine his outlook. The first is
94

ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS

95

that his characteristic tasks are usually in themselves complete: he
will be concerned with a single end, control all the efforts directed
this end, and dispose for this purpose over a definitely given
resources. It is as a result of this that the most characteristic
of
supply
feature of his procedure becomes possible, namely that, at least in

towards

principle, all the parts of the complex of operations are preformed
in the engineer's mind before they start, that all the "data" on which

work is based have explicitly entered his preliminary calculations
and been condensed into the "blue-print" that governs the execution
of the whole scheme. 94 e5 The engineer, in other words, has complete
control of the particular little world with which he is concerned,
surveys it in all its relevant aspects and has to deal only with
"known quantities." So far as the solution of his engineering problem
is concerned, he is not taking part in a social process in which others
the

'

take independent decisions, but lives in a separate world of
own. The application of the technique which he has mastered,
of the generic rules he has been taught, indeed presupposes such

may
his

complete knowledge of the objective facts; those rules refer to objective properties of the things and can be applied only after all the
particular circumstances of time and place have been assembled
and brought under the control of a single brain. His technique, in

other words, refers to typical situations defined in terms of objective
facts, not to the problem of how to find out what resources are
available or what is the relative importance of different needs. He
has been trained in objective possibilities, irrespective of the particular conditions of time and place, in the knowledge of those

properties of things which remain the same everywhere and at all
times and which they possess irrespective of a particular human
situation.
It is important, however, to observe that the engineer's view of
his job as complete in itself is, in some measure, a delusion. He is in
a position in a competitive society to treat it as such because he can

regard that assistance from society at large on which he counts as one
of his data, as given to him without having to bother about it. That
he can buy at given prices the materials and the services of the men

he needs, that if he pays his men they will be able to procure their
food and other necessities, he will usually take for granted. It is

96

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

through basing his plans on the data offered to him by the market
that they are fitted into the larger
it is

complex of

social activities;

and

how

the market provides
he needs that he can treat his job as self-contained.

because he need not concern himself

him with what
So long as market

prices do not change unexpectedly he uses them as
a guide in his calculations without much reflection about their significance. But, though he is compelled to take them into account, they
are not properties of things of the same kind as those which he

understands. They are not objective attributes of things but reflections of a particular human situation at a given time and place. And
as his knowledge does not explain why those changes in prices occur

which often interfere with his plans, any such interference appears
to him due to irrational (i.e., not consciously directed) forces, and
he resents the necessity of paying attention to magnitudes which
appear meaningless to him. Hence the characteristic and ever-recurrent

demand

for the substitution of in natura 96 calculation for the

terms of price or value, i.e., of a calculation
which takes explicit account of the objective properties of things.
"artificial" calculation in

The engineer's ideal which he feels the "irrational" economic
forces prevent him from achieving, based on his study of the objective
properties of the things, is usually some purely technical optimum
of universal validity.
particular

methods

most frequently

is

He

rarely sees that his preference for these

merely a result of the type of problem he has

to solve, and justified only in particular social posimost common problem the builder of machines meets
is to extract from given resources the maximum of power, with the
machinery to be used as the variable under his control, this maximum
utilization of power is set up as an absolute ideal, a value in itself. 97
But there is, of course, no special merit economizing one of the many
factors which limit the possible achievement, at the expense of others.
The engineer's "technical optimum" proves frequently to be simply
that method which it would be desirable to adopt if the supply of
capital were unlimited, or the rate of interest were zero, which would
indeed be a position in which we would aim at the highest possible
rate of transformation of current input into current output. But to
treat this as an immediate goal is to forget that such a state can be
reached only by diverting for a long time resources which are wanted
tions. Since the

ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS

97

to serve current needs to the production of equipment. In other
words, the engineer's ideal is based on the disregard of the most

fundamental economic fact which determines our position here and
now, the scarcity of capital.
The rate of interest is, of course, only one, though the least understood and therefore the most disliked, of those prices which act
as impersonal guides to which the engineer must submit if his plans
fit into the pattern of activity of society as a whole, and
against the restraint of which he chafes because they represent

are to

whose rationale he does not understand. It is one of those
in which the whole complex of human knowledge and wants
is automatically (though by no means faultlessly) recorded, and to
which the individual must pay attention if he wants to keep in step
forces

symbols

with the rest of the system.

If,

instead of using this information in the

abridged form in which it is conveyed to him through the price
system, he were to try in every instance to go back to the objective
facts and take them consciously into consideration, this would be
to dispense with the method which makes it possible for him to
confine himself to the immediate circumstances and to substitute
for it a method which requires that all this knowledge be collected
in one center and explicitly and consciously embodied in a unitary
plan. The application of engineering technique to the whole of
society requires indeed that the director possess the same complete
knowledge of the whole society that the engineer possesses of his
limited world. Central economic planning is nothing but such an
application of engineering principles to the whole of society based
on the assumption that such a complete concentration of all relevant

knowledge
Before

is

possible.

we proceed

98

to consider the significance of this conception

of a rational organization of society, it will be useful to supplement
the sketch of the typical outlook of the engineer by an even briefer

sketch of the functions of the merchant or trader. This will not only
problem of the utilization of

further elucidate the nature of the

knowledge dispersed among many people, but also help to explain
the dislike which not only the engineer but our whole generation
shows for all commercial activities, and the general preference that

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

98

now accorded to "production" compared to the activities which,
somewhat misleadingly, are referred to as "distribution."
Compared with the work of the engineer that of the merchant is
in a sense much more "social," i.e., interwoven with the free activities
is

of other people. He contributes a step towards the achievement now
of one end, now of another, and hardly ever is concerned with the
complete process that serves a final need. What concerns him is not

the achievement of a particular final result of the complete process
in which he takes part, but the best use of the particular means of

which he knows. His special knowledge

is

almost entirely knowledge

of particular circumstances of time or place, or, perhaps, a technique
of ascertaining those circumstances in a given field. But though this
is not of a kind which can be formulated in generic propor
ositions,
acquired once and for all, and though in an age of Science
it is for that reason regarded as knowledge of an inferior kind, it is
for all practical purposes no less important than scientific knowledge.

knowledge

And

while it is perhaps conceivable that all theoretical knowledge
might be combined in the heads of a few experts and thus made
available to a single central authority, it is this knowledge of the
particular, of the fleeting circumstances of the moment and of local
conditions, which will never exist otherwise than dispersed among

many people. The knowledge of when a particular material or
machine can be used most effectively or where they can be obtained
most quickly or cheaply is quite as important for the solution of
a particular task as the knowledge of what is the best material or
machine for the purpose. The former kind of knowledge has little to
do with the permanent properties of classes of things which the
engineer studies, but

And

it is

that the

is

as the person

merchant

will constantly

of the engineer, with
thereby contracts."

The problem

knowledge
whose task

of a particular human situation.
is to take account of these facts

come

whose plans he

into conflict with the ideals

interferes

and whose

dislike

he

of securing an efficient use of our resources is thus
one
of how that knowledge of the particular circumvery largely
stances of the moment can be most effectively utilized; and the task
which faces the designer of a rational order of society is to find a

ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS

method whereby

99

widely dispersed knowledge may best be drawn
the
upon.
begging
question to describe this task, as is usually
done, as one of effectively using the "available" resources to satisfy
this

It is

"existing" needs. Neither the "available" resources nor the "existing"
needs are objective facts in the sense of those with which the engineer
deals in his limited field: they can never be directly known in all

relevant detail to a single planning body. Resources and needs exist
for practical purposes only through somebody knowing about them,
will always be infinitely more known to all the people tothan
can be known to the most competent authority. 100 A sucgether
cessful solution can therefore not be based on the authority dealing

and there

directly with the objective facts, but

must be based on a method of

the knowledge dispersed among all members of society,
knowledge of which in any particular instance the central authority
will usually know neither who possesses it nor whether it exists at all.
It can therefore not be utilized by consciously integrating it into a
coherent whole, but only through some mechanism which will delegate the particular decisions to those who possess it, and for that
purpose supply them with such information about the general situation as will enable them to make the best use of the particular circumstances of which only they know.
This is precisely the function which the various "markets" perform.
Though every party in them will know only a small sector of all the

utilizing

possible sources of supply, or of the uses of, a commodity, yet,
directly or indirectly, the parties are so interconnected that the prices

changes affecting demand or
instrument
for
such
an
communicating to all those
supply.
interested in a particular commodity the relevant information in

register the relevant net results of all
101

It is as

an abridged and condensed form that markets and prices must be
seen

if

we

are to understand their function.

knowledge of

many

They help

people without the need of

first

to utilize the

collecting

it

and thereby make possible that combination of
decentralization of decisions and mutual adjustment of these decisions
which we find in a competitive system.
In aiming at a result which must be based, not on a single body of
integrated knowledge or of connected reasoning which the designer
possesses, but on the separate knowledge of many people, the task
in a single body,

100

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

of social organization differs fundamentally from that of organizing
given material resources. The fact that no single mind can know
more than a fraction of what is known to all individual minds sets
limits to the extent to

which conscious direction can improve upon

the results of unconscious social processes.

Man

has not deliberately

designed
process and has begun to understand it only long after
it had grown up. But that something which not only does not rely on
deliberate control for its working, but which has not even been deliberately designed, should bring about desirable results, which we
this

might not be able to bring about otherwise, is a conclusion the natural
scientist seems to find difficult to accept.
It is because the moral sciences tend to show us such limits to
our conscious control, while the progress of the natural sciences
constantly extends the range of conscious control, that the natural
scientist finds himself so frequently in revolt against the teaching
of the moral sciences. Economics, in particular, after being con-

demned

for employing

methods

different

from those of the natural

condemned because it claims to show limits
by which the natural scientists continuously extend
our conquest and mastery of nature.
scientist,

stands doubly

to the technique

It is this conflict

with a strong

human

instinct, greatly

strengthened

in the person of the scientist and engineer, that makes the teaching
of the moral sciences so very unwelcome. As Bertrand Russell has

well described the position, "the pleasure of planned construction
is one of the most powerful motives in men who combine intelligence

with energy; whatever can be constructed according to a plan, such
the desire to create is not in
man will endeavor to construct
.

.

.

a form of the love of power, and while the
create
exists
there
will be men desirous of using this power
to
power
even if unaided nature would produce a better result than any that
itself idealistic

since

it is

can be brought about by deliberate intention." 102 This statement
occurs, however, at the beginning of a chapter, significantly headed
"Artificially Created Societies," in which Russell himself seems to
support these tendencies by arguing that "no society can be regarded
as fully scientific unless it has been created deliberately with a certain
structure to fulfill certain purposes." 103 As this statement will be understood by most readers, it expresses concisely that scientistic phi-

ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS

101

losophy which through its popularizers has done more to create
the present trend towards socialism than all the conflicts between

economic

interests which,

though they raise a problem, do not nec-

essarily indicate a particular solution. Of the majority of the intellectual leaders of the socialist movement, at least, it is probably

true to say that they are socialists because socialism appears to them,
as A. Bebel, the leader of the German Social Democratic movement

defined

it

and with

sixty years ago, as "science applied in clear

awareness

104

The proof

full insight to all fields

of

human

activity."

program of socialism actually derives from this kind of
scientistic philosophy must be reserved for the detailed historical
studies. At present our concern is mainly to show to what extent
that the

sheer intellectual error in this field may profoundly affect all prospects
of humanity.
What the people who are so unwilling to renounce any of the
powers of conscious control seem to be unable to comprehend is
that this renunciation of conscious power, power which must always
be power by men over other men, is for society as a whole only an
apparent resignation, a self-denial individuals are called upon to

exercise in order to increase the powers of the race, to release the
knowledge and energies of the countless individuals that could never
be utilized in a society consciously directed from the top. The great
misfortune of our generation is that the direction which by the amazing progress of the natural sciences has been given to its interests
is not one which assists us in comprehending the larger process of
which as individuals we form merely a part or in appreciating how

constantly contribute to a common effort without either directing it or submitting to orders of others. To see this requires a kind
of intellectual effort different in character from that necessary for the

we

control of material

tiling^,

an

effort in

which the

traditional education

some practice, but for which the
education seem less and less to prepare.

in the "humanities" gave at least

now predominant
The more our

types of
technical civilization advances

and the more,

therefore,

the study of things as distinct from the study of men and their ideas
qualifies for the more important and influential positions, the more
significant becomes the gulf that separates two different types of

mind: the one represented by the

man whose supreme

ambition

is

102

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

to turn the world round him into an enormous machine, every part
of which, on his pressing a button, moves according to his design;
and the other represented by the man whose main interest is the
all its aspects, who in the study of
or
or
the law, has learned to see the indithe
arts
literature,
history
viduals as part of a process in which his contribution is not directed

growth of the human mind in

but spontaneous, and where he assists in the creation of something
greater than he or any other single mind can ever plan for. It is this

awareness of being part of a social process, and of the manner in
which individual efforts interact, which the education solely in the
Sciences or in technology seems so lamentably to fail to convey. It is
not surprising that many of the more active minds among those so
trained sooner or later react violently against the deficiencies of their

education and develop a passion for imposing on society the order
which they are unable to detect by the means with which they are
familiar.

In conclusion

more

that all

it is,

we have

perhaps, desirable to remind the reader once
said here is directed solely against a misuse

of Science, not against the scientist in the special field where he is
competent, but against the application of his mental habits in fields

where he is not competent. There is no conflict between our conclusions and those of legitimate science. The main lesson at which
we have arrived is indeed the same as that which one of the acutest
students of scientific method has drawn from a survey of all fields
of knowledge: it is that "the great lesson of humility which science
teaches us, that we can never be omnipotent or omniscient, is the
same as that of all great religions: man is not and never will be the
105
god before whom he must bow down."

Part

Two

THE
COUNTER-REVOLUTION
OF SCIENCE
The age preferred the

reign of intellect to the reign of liberty.

LORD ACTON.

I
THE SOURCE OF THE SCIENTISTIC HUBRIS:
L'ECOLE POLYTECHNIQUE
NEVER WILL MAN

1.

penetrate deeper into error than

continuing on a road which has led him

when he

to great success.

And

is

never

can pride in the achievements of the natural sciences and confidence
omnipotence of their methods have been more justified than at
the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and nowhere
more so than at Paris where almost all the great scientists of the age

in the

congregated. If

wards

it is

true, therefore, that the

social affairs in the nineteenth century

new
is

attitude of

due

to the

man

to-

new men-

acquired in the intellectual and material conquest of nature,
should expect it to appear where modern science celebrated its

tal habits

we

greatest triumphs. In this we shall not be disappointed. Both the two
great intellectual forces which in the course of the nineteenth century

modern socialism and that species of
positivism, which we prefer to call scientism, spring directly
from this body of professional scientists and engineers which grew up
in Paris, and more particularly from the new institution which emtransformed social thought

modern

bodied the new
It is

well

spirit as

known

that

no other, the Ecole poly technique.
French Enlightenment was characterized by

a general enthusiasm for the natural sciences as never yet known beNewton which later was to
be carried to ridiculous heights by Saint-Simon. And the new passion
fore. Voltaire is the father of that cult of

soon began to bear great fruits. At first the interest concentrated on
the subjects connected with Newton's great name. In Clairault and
d'Alembert, with Euler the greatest mathematicians of the period,

Newton soon found worthy successors who in turn were followed
by Lagrange and Laplace, no less giants. And with Lavoisier, not
105

106

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

only the founder of modern chemistry but also a great physiologist,
and, to a lesser degree, with Buffon in biological science, France

began to take the lead

in all important fields of natural

knowledge.

The

great Encyclopaedic was a gigantic attempt to unify and popularize the achievements of the new science, and d'Alembert's "Dis-

cours preliminaire" (1754) to the great work, in which he attempted
to trace the rise, progress and affinities of the various sciences, may

be regarded as the Introduction not only to the work but to a whole
period. This great mathematician and physicist did much to prepare
the way for the revolution in mechanics by which towards the end of
the century his pupil Lagrange finally freed it from all metaphysical
concepts and restated the whole subject without any reference to ultimate causes or hidden forces, merely describing the laws by which
the effects were connected. 1 No other single step in any science ex-

more clearly the tendency of the scientific movement of the
had greater influence or symbolic significance. 2
Yet while this step was still gradually preparing in the field where
it was to take its most conspicuous form, the general tendency which
it expressed was already recognized and described by d'Alembert's
contemporary Turgot. In the amazing and masterly discourses which
as a young man of 23 he delivered at the opening and the closing of
the session of the Sorbonne in 1750, and in the sketch of a Discourse
on Universal History of the same period, he outlined how the advance of our knowledge of nature was accompanied throughout by
a gradual emancipation from those anthropomorphic concepts which
presses
age or

led man to interpret natural phenomena after his own image as
animated by a mind like his own. This idea, which was later to become the leading theme of positivism and was ultimately misapplied
first

to the science of
larized

man

himself,

was soon afterwards widely popu-

name of fetishism, 3 the
was much later replaced

by President C. de Brosses under the

name under which

it

remained known

till it

by the expressions anthropomorphism and animism. But Turgot went
even further and, completely anticipating Comte on this point, described

how

this

process of emancipation passed through three stages

where, after supposing that natural

phenomena were produced by

intelligent beings, invisible but resembling ourselves, they

began to

be explained by abstract expressions such as essences and

faculties,

THE SOURCE OF THE SCIENTISTIC HUBRIS

107

till at last
"by observing reciprocal mechanical action of bodies hypotheses were formed which could be developed by mathematics and

4

verified

by experience."
It has often been pointed out 5 that most of the leading ideas of
French Positivism had already been formulated by d'Alembert and
Turgot and their friends and pupils Lagrange and Condorcet. For
most of what is valid and valuable in that doctrine this is unquestionably true, although their positivism differed from that of Hume
by a strong tinge of French rationalism. And, as there will be no opportunity to go into this aspect

more

fully, it

should perhaps be spe-

development of
due
to the influelement, probably
ence of Descartes, continued to play an important role. 6
It must be pointed out however that these great French thinkers
of the eighteenth century showed scarcely any trace yet of that

cially

stressed

at

French positivism

illegitimate

this

that throughout

stage

the

this rationalist

extension to the

methods of thought which

phenomena
became

later

of society of scientistic

so characteristic of that

School excepting perhaps certain ideas of Turgot about the philosophy of history and still more so some of Condorcet's last suggestions. But none of them had any doubt about the legitimacy of the
abstract and theoretical method in the study of social phenomena,
and they were all staunch individualists. It is particularly interesting
to observe that Turgot, and the same is true of David Hume, was at
the same time one of the founders of positivism and of abstract economic theory, against which positivism was later to be employed. But
in some respects most of these men unwittingly started trains of
thought which produced views on social matters very different from
their own.
This is particularly true of Condorcet. A mathematician like d'Alembert and Lagrange, he definitely turned to the theory as well as to the
practice of politics. And although to the last he understood that
"meditation alone

man,"

7

may

lead us to general truths in the science of
this by extensive

he was not merely anxious to supplement

observation but occasionally expressed himself as if the method of
the natural sciences were the only legitimate one in the treatment of
the problems of society. It was particularly his desire to apply his be-

loved mathematics, especially the newly developed calculus of proba-

108

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

second sphere of interest, which led him to stress more
and more the study of those social phenomena which would be ob8
jectively observed and measured. As early as 1783, in the oration
at his reception into the Academic, he gave expression to what was
to become a favorite idea of positivist sociology, that of an observer
to whom physical and social phenomena would appear in the same
light, because, "a stranger to our race, he would study human society
as we study those of the beavers and bees." 9 And although he admits
that this is an unattainable ideal because "the observer is himself a
bility, to his

human society," he repeatedly exhorts the scholars "to introduce into the moral sciences the philosophy and the method of the

part of

natural sciences."

10

The most seminal

of his suggestions however occurs in his Sketch

of a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind, the famous Testament of the Eighteenth Century, as it has been called, in
which the unbounded optimism of the age found its last and greatest
expression. Tracing human progress in a great outline through all
history, he conceives of a science which might foresee the future
11
But to estabprogress of the human race, accelerate and direct it.
lish laws which will enable us to predict the future, history must
cease to be a history of individuals and must become a history of the

masses, must at the same time cease to be a record of individual facts
but must become based on systematic observation. 12 Why should the

attempt to base on the results of the history of the human race a
its future destiny be regarded as chimerical? "The only

picture of

foundation for the knowledge of the natural sciences is the idea that
the general laws, known or unknown, which regulate the phenomena
of the Universe, are necessary and constant; and why should that
principle be less true for the intellectual and moral faculties of man

than for the other actions of nature?"
historical

development and the

merely as bold suggestions,

it is

13

The

idea of natural laws of
view of history were born,
but to remain with us in a con-

collectivist

true,

tinuous tradition to the present day. 14
2.

Condorcet himself became a victim of the Revolution. But

work guided

to a large extent that

educational reforms, and

it

same Revolution,

was only

his

particularly its
as a result of these that towards

THE SOURCE OF THE SCIENTISTIC HUBRIS
the beginning of the

new century

109

the great institutionalized and cenwhich created one of the most

tralized organization of science arose

glorious periods of scientific advance, became not only the birthplace
of that scientism which is more particularly our concern but was
probably also largely responsible for the relative decline of the position of

the

first

French science in the course of the century from indubitably
place in the world to one not only behind Germany but also

behind other nations. As is so often the case with similar movements,
was only on the second or third generation that the mischief was

it

done by the pupils of the great men who exaggerated the ideas of
their masters and misapplied them beyond their proper limits.
In three respects the direct consequences of the Revolution are of
special interest to us. In the first place, the very collapse of the ex-

immediate application of all the knowlwhich
the
as
concrete manifestation of that Reason
edge
appeared
which was the Goddess of the Revolution. As one of the new scientific journals which sprang up at the end of the Terror expressed it:
isting institutions called for

"The Revolution has razed everything to the ground. Government,
morals, habits, everything has to be rebuilt. What a magnificent site
for the architects! What a grand opportunity of making use of all the
fine and excellent ideas that had remained speculative, of employing
so many materials that could not be used before, of rejecting so
many others that had been obstructions for centuries and which one

had been forced

to use."

15

we must briefly
and the creation of an
entirely new educational system which had profound effects on the
outlook and general views of the whole next generation. The third is
The second consequence

consider

is

of the Revolution which

the complete destruction of the old

more particularly the foundation of the Ecole Poly technique.
The Revolution had swept away the old system of colleges and
universit6s which was based largely on classical education, and after
some short-lived experiments replaced them in 1795 by the new
6coles centrales which became the sole centers of secondary education. 16 In conformity with the ruling spirit and by an over-violent reaction against the older schools, the teaching in the new institutions
was for some years confined almost exclusively to the scientific subjects. Not only the ancient languages were reduced to a minimum

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

110
and

in practice

ligious

almost entirely neglected, even the instruction in

grammar, and history was very

erature,

a

and moral and

lit-

re-

of course, completely absent. 17 Although after
reform endeavored to make good some of the

instruction,

some years

inferior,

new

18

the interruption for a series of years of the instruction in those subjects was sufficient to change the whole intellectual atmosphere. Saint-Simon described this change in 1812 or

gravest deficiences,

1813: "Such is the difference in this respect between the state of ...
even thirty years ago and that of today that while in those not distant
days, if one wanted to know whether a person had received a distinguished education, one asked:

"Does he know

his

Greek and

Latin authors well?,' today one asks: *Is he good at mathematics? Is
he familiar with the achievements of physics, of chemistry, of natural
history, in
" 19
tion?'

short,

of the positive sciences and those of observa-

Thus a whole generation grew up to whom that great storehouse
of social wisdom, the only form indeed in which an understanding of
the social processes achieved by the greatest minds is transmitted,
the great literature of all ages, was a closed book. For the first time

man

new type appeared which as the product of the GerRealschule and of similar institutions was to become so impor-

tant

and

in history that

influential in the later nineteenth

the technical specialist

had passed through

and the twentieth century:

who was

difficult

regarded as educated because he
schools but who had little or no knowl-

growth, problems and its values, which only
the study of history, literature and languages can give.

edge of society,

its life,

Not only in secondary education but still more so in higher
3.
education the Revolutionary Convention had created a new type of
institution which was to become permanently established and a
model imitated by the whole world: the Ecole Poly technique. The
wars of the Revolution and the help which some of the scientists had
been able to render in the production of essential supplies 20 had led
to a new appreciation of the need of trained engineers, in the first
instance for military purposes. But industrial advance also created a
new interest in machines. Scientific and technological progress created

a widespread enthusiasm for technological studies, which expressed

THE SOURCE OF THE SCIENTISTIC HUBRIS
itself in

111

the foundation of such societies as the Association philo-

21
technique and the Societe poly technique.
Higher technical education had till then been confined to specialized schools such as the

Chausses and the various military schools. It was
G. Monge, the founder of descriptive geomof
Minister
Marine
etry,
during the Revolution and later friend of
Napoleon, taught. He sponsored the idea of a single great school in

Ecole des Fonts
at

one of the

which

all

jects they

et

latter that

classes of engineers should receive their training in the subhad in common. 22 He communicated that idea to Lazare

Carnot, the "organizer of victory," his old pupil and himself no
23

physicist and engineer.
the new institution which

mean

These two men impressed their stamp on
was created in 1794. The new Ecole Poly-

24
to be devoted
)
(against the advice of Laplace
in
contrast
the
Ecole
the
to
to
sciences
Normale,
applied
mainly
created at the same time and devoted to theory
and remained so

technique was

ten or twenty years of its existence. The whole teaching centered, to a much higher degree than is still true of similar institutions, around Monge's subject, descriptive geometry, or the art

during the

first

of blue-print making, as we may call it to show its special significance
25
First organized on essentially civilian lines, the
engineers.

for

School was later given a purely military organization by Napoleon
also, however much he favored it otherwise, resisted any attempt

who

curriculum, and conceded even the provision of a
course in so harmless a subject as literature only with reluctance. 26
Yet in spite of the limitations as to the subjects taught, and the
to liberalize

its

even more serious limitations of the previous education of the students in its early years, the Ecole commanded from the very beginning a teaching staff probably more illustrious than any other institu-

Europe has had before or since. Lagrange was among its first
professors, and although Laplace was not a regular teacher there, he
was connected with the school in many ways, including the office of
chairman of its council. Monge, Fourier, Prony, and Poinsot were
among the first generation of teachers of mathematical and physical
subjects; Berthollet, who continued the work of Lavoisier, and sevtion in

eral others hardly less distinguished, 27 taught chemistry.

The second

new

century in-

generation which began to take over early

in the

112

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

eluded such names as Poisson, Ampfere, Gay-Lussac, Th6nard,
Arago, Cauchy, Fresnel, Malus, to mention only the best known, incidentally nearly all ex-students of the Ecole. The institution had
only existed for a few years when it had become famous all over

Europe, and the

first interval of peace in 1801-2 brought Volta,
Count Rumford and Alexander von Humboldt 28 on pilgrimage to

the

4.

new temple
This

is

of science.

not the place to speak at length of the conquests of naWe are only concerned with the

ture associated with these names.

general spirit of exuberance which they engendered, with the feeling
which they created that there were no limits to the powers of the
human mind and to the extent to which man could hope to harness
and control all the forces which so far had threatened and intimi-

dated him. Nothing perhaps expresses more clearly this spirit than
Laplace's bold idea of a world formula which he expressed in a fa-

mous passage
mind that in a

of his Essai philosophique sur les Probabilites: "A
given instance knew all the forces by which nature is

animated and the position of all the bodies of which it is composed,
were vast enough to include all these data within his analysis,
could embrace in one single formula the movements of the largest

if it

bodies of the Universe and of the smallest atoms; nothing would be
uncertain for him; the future and the past would be equally before
his eyes." 29 This idea, which exercised so profound a fascination 30
of scientistically-minded people is, as is now becomnot
ing apparent,
only a conception which describes an unattainable
ideal, but in fact a quite illegitimate deduction from the principles by

on generations

which we establish laws for particular physical events. It is now itself
31
regarded by modern positivists as a "metaphysical fiction."
It has been well described how the whole of the teaching at the
Ecole Polytechnique was penetrated with the positivist spirit of Lagrange and all the courses and the textbooks used were modelled on
his example. 82 Perhaps even more important, however, for the general outlook of the polytechnicians was the definite practical bent inherent in all its teaching, the fact that all the sciences were taught
mainly in their practical applications and that all the pupils looked
forward to using their knowledge as military or civil engineers. The

THE SOURCE OF THE SCIENTISTIC HUBRIS

113

very type of the engineer with his characteristic outlook, ambitions,
limitations was here created. That synthetic spirit which would

and

not recognize sense in anything that had not been deliberately constructed, that love of organization that springs from the twin sources
of military and engineering practices, 33 the aesthetic predilection for
everything that had been consciously constructed over anything that

was a strong new element which was added to
even began to replace the revolutionary
of
ardor
the young polytechnicians. The peculiar characteristics of
this new type who, as it has been said, "prided themselves on having
more precise and more satisfactory solutions than anyone else for all
34
and who "ventured to
political, religious and social questions,"
create a religion as one learns at the Ecole to build a bridge or a
road" 35 was early noticed, and their propensity to become socialists
has often been pointed out. 36 Here we must confine ourselves to point
out that it was in this atmosphere that Saint-Simon conceived some
of the earliest and most fantastic plans for the reorganization of society, and that it was at the Ecole Polytechnique where, during the

had
and

"just grown,"

in the course of time

twenty years of its existence, Auguste Comte, Prosper Enfantin,
Victor Considerant and some hundreds of later Saint-Simonians and

first

Fourierists received their training, followed by a succession of social
reformers throughout the century down to Georges Sorel. 37

But, whatever the tendencies

among

the pupils of the institution,

must again be pointed out that the great scientists who built the
fame of the Ecole Polytechnique were not guilty of illegitimate extensions of their technique and habits of thought to fields which were
not their own. They little concerned themselves with problems of
man and society. 38 This was the province of another group of men,
in their time no less influential and admired, but whose efforts to
continue the eighteenth century traditions in the social sciences were
in the end to be swamped by the tide of scientism and silenced by
political persecution. It was the misfortune of the ideologues, as they
called themselves, that their very name should be perverted into a
catchword describing the very opposite from what they stood for,
and that their ideas should fall into the hands of the young engineers
who distorted and changed them beyond recognition.
it

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

114

It is a curious fact that the French scholars of the time of
5.
which we are speaking should have been divided into two "distinct
societies which had only one single trait in common, the celebrity of
39

The first were the professors and examiners at the
Ecole Polytechnique which we already know and those at the College
de France. The second was the group of physiologists, biologists and
their

names."

psychologists, mostly connected with the Ecole de
as the Ideologues.

known
Not

all

Medecine and

of the great biologists of which France could boast at the

time belonged to this second group. At the College de France, Cuvier, the founder of comparative anatomy and probably the most
famous of them, stood close to the pure scientists. The advances of
the biological sciences as expounded by him contributed perhaps as

much

as anything else to create the belief in the omnipotence of the
methods of pure science. More and more problems that had seemed
to evade the powers of exact treatment were shown to be conquerable by the same methods. 40 The two other biologists whose names
are now even better known than his, Lamarck and Geoffroy St.
Hilaire, remained at the periphery of the ideologist group and did

not concern themselves

much

with the study of

man

as a thinking

But Cabanis and Main de Biran, with their friends Destutt de
Tracy and Degerando, made the latter the central problem of their
being.

labors.

Ideology,

41

in the sense in

which the term was used by that group,

analysis of human ideas and of human action, inrelation
the
between man's physical and mental constitucluding
42 43
tion.
The inspiration of the group came mainly from Condillac

meant simply the

and the field of their studies was outlined by Cabanis, one of the
founders of physiological psychology, in his Rapports du physique et
du moral de Vhomme (1802). And although there was much talk
among them about applying the methods of natural science to man,

meant no more than that they proposed to study man without
prejudices and without nebulous speculations about his end and destiny. But this prevented neither Cabanis nor his friends from devoting
a large part of their life work to that analysis of human ideas which
gave ideology its name. Nor did it occur to them to doubt the legitimacy of introspection. If the second head of the group, Destutt de
this

THE SOURCE OF THE SCIENTISTIC HUBRIS

115
44

Tracy, proposed to regard the whole of ideology as part of zoology,
this did not preclude his confining himself entirely to that part of it

which he called ideologic rationelle, in contrast to the ideologic
and which consisted of logic, grammar and eco-

physiologique,

nomics. 45

cannot be denied that in all this, out of their enthusiasm for the
pure sciences, they used many misleading expressions which were
grossly misunderstood by Saint-Simon and Comte. Cabanis in parIt

must be the basis of the moral
but with him too this meant no more than that account
sciences;
must be taken of the physiological bases of mental activities, and he
always recognized the three seperate parts of the "science de
rhomme," physiology, analysis of ideas, and morals. 47 But, in so far
ticular stressed repeatedly that physics
4C

as the problems of society are concerned, while Cabanis'

mained mainly programatic

in character, Destutt

work

re-

de Tracy made

very important contributions. We need mention here only one: his
analysis of value and its relation to utility, where, proceeding from
the foundations laid by Condillac, he went very far in providing what

economy lacked and what might have saved
from the impasse into which it got a correct theory of value.
Destutt de Tracy (and Louis Say, who later continued his work)
may indeed be said to have anticipated by more than half a century
what was to become one of the most important advances of social
classical English political
it

48
theory, the subjective (or marginal utility) theory of value.
It is true that others outside their circle went much further in the

application of the technique of the natural sciences to social phenomena, particularly the Societe des Observateurs de VHomme,

which, largely under Cuvier's influence, went some way in confining
social study to a mere recording of observations reminiscent of similar organizations of

our

own

day.

49

But on the whole there can be

no doubt

that the ideologues preserved the best tradition of the eighteenth century philosophes. And while their colleagues at the Ecole
Polytechnique became the admirers and friends of Napoleon and re-

from him all possible support, the ideologues remained
staunch defenders of individual freedom and consequently incurred
the wrath of the despot.

cieved

116

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

It was Napoleon who gave currency to the word ideologue in
new sense by using it as a favorite expression of contempt for all
those who ventured to defend freedom against him. 50 And he did not
content himself with abuse. The man who understood better than any

6.

its

of his imitators that "in the long run the sword is always beaten by
the spirit" did not hesitate to carry his "repugnance for all discussion

and the teaching of

51
into practice.
political matters"

The economist

B. Say, a member of the ideologist group and for some years editor of its journal, the Decade philosophique, was one of the first to
J.

feel the strong

hand.

When

he refused to change a chapter in his

Traite d'economie politique to suit the wishes of the dictator, the second edition was prohibited and the author removed from the tribu-

nat* 2 In 1806 Destutt de Tracy had to appeal to President Jefferson
to secure the publication of at least an English translation of his
Commentaire sur I'Esprit des lots which he was not allowed to pub53
A little earlier (1803) the whole of the
lish in his own country.
second class of the Institut, that of the moral and political science,
had been suppressed. 54 In consequence, these subjects remained excluded from the great Tableau de I'etat et des progres des sciences et
des arts depuis 1789 which the three classes of the Institut had been
ordered to furnish in 1802. This was symbolic of the whole position
of these subjects under the Empire. The teaching of them was prevented and the whole younger generation grew up in ignorance of the
achievements of the past. The door was thus opened to a new start
unencumbered by the accumulated results of earlier study. Social
problems were to be approached from a new angle. The methods,
which since d'Alembert had so successfully been used in physics,
whose character had now become explicit, and which more recently
had been equally successful in chemistry and biology, were now to

be applied to the science of man. With what
ally see.

results

we

shall

gradu-

II
THE "ACCOUCHEUR D'IDEES":
HENRI DE SAINT-SIMON
Early training and experience can hardly be said to have
qualified the count Henri de Saint-Simon for the role of a scientific
reformer. But it must be admitted that when in 1798, at the age of
1.

55
he took up his abode opposite the Ecole Poly technique, hence38,
forth to interpret 'to the world the significance of scientific progress
for the study of society, he was already a man of rich and varied ex-

perience; but scientific study had scarcely been included. The facts
of his earlier life, only quite recently brought to light, 56 are considerably less elevating than the numerous anecdotes which he himself

and

his pupils

have transmitted

to us

and which

until lately

formed

almost our sole information about his youth. The legends tell us that
he descended from Charlemagne, that d'Alembert supervised his education, and that his valet had orders to wake the ambitious young
man daily with the words: Levez-vous, Monsieur le Comte, vous

avez de grandes choses d, faire. All this is not altogether impossible.
It is certain, however, that for the first twenty years of his adult life
he lived the life of an adventurer, as many sons of aristocratic families must have done during the period, but on a scale and with an
intensity that can have been equalled by few of his contemporaries.
Almost as soon as he obtained a commission in the French Army
he followed Lafayette to America and when, after four years, fighting
ceased, he bade farewell to his profession. Even before this we find
little later he
him dreaming of piercing the Isthmus of Panama.

A

offered his services in Holland for an expedition against the British
Indies and was also concerned more concretely with projects for

building canals in Spain.

The Revolution found him back

in Paris,

117

118

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

as the citoyen Bonhomme, forswearing his title and acting the extreme Sansculotte. But soon more profitable ventures offered themselves. In the sale of the church lands we find him as one of the most
active intermediaries, speculating with borrowed
sal scale, one of the great profiteers of inflation,

any business that came

his

lead from the roofs of Notre

money on a coloswho did not scorn

way, such as an attempted sale of the

Dame.

It is

not surprising to find him in

prison during the terror. It was during the time he spent there that
according to his own account he decided on the career of a philosopher. But, released, he once more preferred financial to metaphysical
speculation. So long as the source of his funds (a Saxon diplomatist)

continued to provide him with sufficient capital, he tried his hand at
all sorts of commercial ventures, such as organizing a stage coach
service, selling

wine

retail,

and even "repuband queens were
His plans were even more ambi-

manufacturing

textiles

lican" playing cards in which the obnoxious kings

replaced by

le

genie and la liberte.
to have begun the construction of

He seems

some large indusand
he
at
least
a
combined
commercial
plant
contemplated
and banking enterprise that "should be unique in the world." He also
acted as spokesman for French financial interests at the AngloFrench discussions at Lille in 1797.
All these activities, however, came to a sudden end when in 1798
his partner returned to Paris and asked to be shown the accounts.
Saint-Simon certainly knew what high living meant, and his house, run
by the former maitre d'hotel of the Due de Choiseul, and his kitchen,
presided over by an equally reputed chef, were famous. But that all
the costs of this should have gone down as expenses on the
joint account rather upset the good Saxon count. He withdrew his
funds, and Saint-Simon, still in possession of a fortune, substantial
but no longer adequate to support further grandiose ventures, found
it advisable to withdraw from commercial
activity and henceforth to
tious.

trial

seek glory in the intellectual sphere.
We need not doubt that in the mind of the disappointed faiseur

vague plans for the reorganization of society were already forming;
and it is not surprising that he should soon find that all his experiences had not provided him with the knowledge which would enable
to elaborate these ideas. He therefore decided "to employ his

him

THE "ACCOUCHEUR D'IDEES": HENRI DE SAINT-SIMON

119

to acquire scientific knowledge." 57 It was at this time that he
spent three years in close contact with the teachers and students of

money

the Ecole Poly technique as a kind of Maecenas-pupil, feasting the
professors and assisting the students, one of whom, the great mathematician Poisson, he entirely supported for years and treated as his

adopted son.

The method of study which Saint-Simon chose for himself was not
of the ordinary. Feeling that his brain was no longer elastic enough
to pursue a systematic course, he preferred to learn what he could
in the more pleasant form of dinner-table conversation. He asked the
scholars from whose knowledge he hoped to profit to his house, and

appears even to have married for the sole purpose of keeping a house
where he could properly entertain the great savants. Lagrange,
Monge, Berthollet, and, probably after 1801, when he felt he had
completed his education in the mechanical sciences and moved to
the neighborhood of the Ecole de Medecine, Gall, Cabanis, and Bichat, are reported to have partaken of his hospitality. Yet this method
of study seems to have proved to be of questionable value. At any
rate in later life our hero complained to a friend that his "scholars

and

artists ate

much but

talked

little.

After dinner

I

went

to

sit

in

an

easy chair in a corner of the salon and fell asleep. Fortunately
Madame de Saint-Simon did the honneurs with much grace and
esprit."

58

Whether it was merely that he became aware that this had been a
bad investment and decided to cut the losses, or whether it was that
another marriage appeared to him a more attractive method of instruction, yet not only the dinners but also the marriage came to an
end soon after he had moved to the new place. He explained to his
first man of the world ought to be married to the first
woman" and that, therefore, with much regret he had to ask her to be
released. Was it an accident that the divorce was effected in the
month after Madame de Stael had become a widow, the Madame de

wife that "the

in a book that had fired Saint-Simon's imagination, had
celebrated
the "positive sciences" and emphasized that the
only just
"science of politics was yet to be created?" 59 It is alleged that as
soon as he was free he hurried to Le Coppet on the Lake of Geneva

Stael

who,

and proposed

in the following words:

"Madame, you

are the

most

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

120

extraordinary

woman on

earth and I

am

the

most extraordinary man;

undoubtedly produce a still more extraordinary
child." Legend adds that he also proposed that they should celebrate
their nuptials in a balloon. About the terms in which the refusal was
together

we

shall

couched the versions vary.

The

2.

visit to

Switzerland was also the occasion of Saint-Simon's

publication. In 1803 there appeared in Geneva the Lettres d'un
habitant de Geneve 4 ses contemporains, QO a little tract in which the
Voltairean cult of Newton was revived in a fantastically exaggerated
first

It begins by proposing that a subscription should be opened
before the tomb of Newton to finance the project of a great "Council

form.
of

Newton"

for which each subscriber

is

to

have the right of nomi-

nating three mathematicians, three physicists, three chemists, three
61
physiologists, three litterateurs, three painters and three musicians.

The twenty-one scholars and artists thus elected by the whole of
mankind, and presided over by the mathematician who received the
largest

number of

votes,

the representatives of

62

should become in their collective capacity
the Pope, the

God on earth, 63 who would deprive

cardinals, bishops and the priests of their office because they do not
understand the divine science which God has entrusted to them and

which some day will again turn earth into paradise. 64 In the divisions
and sections into which the supreme Council of Newton will divide
the world, similar local Councils of Newton will be created which
will have to organize worship, research and instruction in and
around the temples of Newton which will be built everywhere. 65

Why

this

new

"social organization," as Saint-Simon calls

it

for the

time in an unpublished manuscript of the same period? 66 Because we are still governed by people who do not understand the gen-

first

eral laws that rule the universe. "It

is necessary that the physiolofrom
chase
their
the
gists
company
philosophers, moralists and
as
the
astronomers
have
chased out the astrolometaphysicians just

gers

and the chemists have chased out the alchemists."

ologists are competent in the

bodies; and

first

instance because

"we

67

The physiare organized

by regarding our social relationships as physiological
phenomena that I have conceived the project which I present to
you."

68

it is

THE "ACCOUCHEUR D'IDEES": HENRI DE SAINT-SIMON

121

But the physiologists themselves are not yet quite scientific enough.
They have yet to discover how their science can reach the perfection
of astronomy by basing itself on the single law to which God has sub69
It will be the
jected the universe, the law of universal gravitation.
task of the Council of Newton by exercising its spiritual power to

make people understand

this law. Its tasks, however, go far beyond
not only have to vindicate the rights of the men of ge70
nius, the scientists, the artists and all the people with liberal views;
it will also have to reconcile the second class of people, the propri-

that. It will

and the third, the people without property, to whom SaintSimon addresses himself specially as his friends and whom he exhorts to accept this proposal which is the only way to prevent that
"struggle which, from the nature of things, necessarily always exists
etors,

between" the two

classes. 71

revealed to Saint-Simon by the Lord himself, who announces to His prophet that He has placed Newton at His side and
All this

entrusted

is

him with

the enlightenment of the inhabitants of

all

planets.

famous passage from which much
of later Saint-Simonian doctrine springs: "All men will work; they
will regard themselves as laborers attached to one workshop whose

The

instruction culminates in the

efforts will

be directed to guide human intelligence according to my
The supreme Council of Newton will direct their
Saint-Simon has no qualms about the means that will be

divine foresight.

works."

72

employed

to enforce the instructions of his central planning

"Anybody who does not obey

body:

the orders will be treated by the others

as a quadruped." 73

In condensing we had to try and bring some order into the incoherent and rambling jumble of ideas which this first pamphlet of
Saint-Simon represents. It is the outpouring of a megalomaniac visionary who sprouts half-digested ideas, who all the time is trying to
attract the attention of the world to his unappreciated genius and to
the necessity of financing his works, and who does not forget to provide for himself as the founder of the new religion great power and

the chairmanship of all the Councils for
3.

Soon

life.

work, Saint-Simon found
were entirely exhausted and the next few years he

after the publication of this first

that his funds

74

122

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

spent in increasing misery, importuning his old friends and associates
with demands for money and, it appears, not stopping short of black-

Even his appeals to now powerful friends of the past, such as
Comte de Segur, Napoleon's grand maitre des ceremonies, procured him in the end no more than the miserable and humiliating
mail.

the

pawnbroking institution. After six months of
weakened
and
he
met his former valet, who took him into
this,
ill,
his house. For four years (1806-1810) until his death that devoted
servant provided for all the needs of his ex-master and even defrayed
position of copyist in a

the cost of printing Saint-Simon's next work.
It seems that during this period Saint-Simon read more extensively
than ever before; at least the Introduction aux travaux scientifiques
du XIX6 siecle 75 shows a wide although still very superficial and ill-

The main
somewhat
changed. Before science can organize society, science itself must be
76
The Council of Newton therefore now becomes the ediorganized.
torial committee of a great new Encyclopaedia which is to systematize
and unify all knowledge: "We must examine and co-ordinate it all
from the point of view of Physicism." 77 This physicism is not merely
digested knowledge of the scientific literature of the period.
is still the same, but the methods proposed have

theme

new

general scientific method; it is to be a new religion, even if at
78
It is to be the third great stage in
first only for the educated classes.
the evolution of religion from Polytheism through "Deism" 79 to

a

Physicism. But although the growth of Physicism has now been under
80
way for eleven hundred years, the victory is not yet complete. The
reason is that the work of the past, particularly that of the French
Encyclopedists,

was merely

critical

and

destructive. 81 It

for the

is

great Emperor Napoleon, "the scientific chief of humanity as he is its
political chief," "the most positive man of the age," to organize the
scientific

system in a

new encyclopedia worthy

of his name. 82

Under

his direction the

create a

work

"physicist clergy" in the atelier scientifique will
that will organize physicism and found, on reasoning

and observation, the principles which for ever will serve as guides
to humanity. 83 The greatest man after the Emperor, and that is "undoubtedly the man who admires him most profoundly," offers himself for

the task as his "scientific lieutenant, as a second Descartes,

THE "ACCOUCHEUR D'IDEES": HENRI DE SAINT-SIMON
under whose leadership the works of the new school
digious."

will

123

be pro-

8*

this work is no more systematic than
After a vain attempt at coherent exposition it soon becomes admittedly a collection of disjointed notes from Saint-Simon's
It

the

need hardly be said that

first.

portefeuille.

He abandoned

the ambitious plan outlined at the be-

ginning, as he himself explains in the sketch of his autobiography,
because of lack of funds, or as he admits elsewhere, because he was

not yet ripe for the task. 85 Yet, with

remarkable document.
characteristics of the

It

all its defects,

combines, for the

modern

first

the

work

time, nearly

scientistic organizer.

is

all

a

the

The enthusiasm

for physicism (it is now called physicalism) and the use of "physical
86
the attempt to "unify science" and to make it the basis
language,"
of morals, the contempt for all "theological," that is anthropomorphic, reasoning,

87

the desire to organize the

work

of others, partic-

by editing a great encyclopedia, and the wish to plan life in
general on scientific lines are all present. One could sometimes believe that one is reading a contemporary work of an H. G. Wells, a
Lewis Mumford, or an Otto Neurath. Nor is the complaint missing
about the intellectual crisis, the moral chaos, which must be overularly

come by

the imposition of a new scientific creed. The book
the Lettres d'un habitant de Geneve, the first

more than

is

indeed,

and most

important document of that "counter-revolution of science," as their
88
which later found
fellow-reactionary Bonald called the movement,
more open expression in Saint-Simon's avowed desire to "terminate
the revolution"

ginning of both

by conscious re-organization of society. It is the bemodern positivism and modern socialism, which, thus,

both began as definitely reactionary and authoritarian movements.
The Introduction, addressed to his fellow scientists, was not published but merely printed in a small number of copies for distribution
among the members of the Institut. But although the great scientists
to whom he sent it took no notice, he continued to appeal to them

for assistance in a

number

of smaller tracts of a similar character.

We

can pass over the various minor writings of the next few years, which
were mainly concerned with the project of an encyclopedia; during
this time we find, gradually added to the megalomania of the prophet,
the characteristic persecution mania of the verkannte Genie which ex-

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

124

itself in violent abuse of the formerly so admired Laplace,
he suspected of being responsible for his neglect. 89

pressed

whom

There are no further important developments in Saint-Simon's
writings till 1813. Once more plunged into abject poverty by the
death of his faithful valet, he starved and in the end fell dangerously
ill. He was rescued
by an old acquaintance, a notaire, who negotiated
a settlement with his family under which, in return for giving up all
expectations of future inheritance, he received a small annual pen4.

sion.

Once again

settled in tolerable comfort, his

work entered a new

phase. Finally disillusioned in his hope of obtaining the collaboration
of the physicists, he turned away from the brutiers, infinitesimaux,

whom

he no longer conceded the right
advance guard of humanity, and
taking up the second strand of though from his first work, he turned

algebristes et arithmeticiens

to regard themselves as the scientific

again to the biologists.
In his Memoire sur la science de
ever,

still

bears the separate

title

Vhomme (part of which, howTravail sur la gravitation univerphysiology, of which the science

problem is again how
a part, can be treated by the methods adopted by the phys91
and thus follow those sciences in the progress from
ical sciences

selle), his

of

man

is

the "conjectural" to the "positive" stage. 92 With the science of man,
as part and summit of physiology, morals and politics must also become positive sciences, 93 and thus "the passage from the idea of
particular laws regulating the phenomena of the divers branches
of physics to the idea of a single and unique law regulating them
all" must become completed. 94 When this is achieved and all the par-

many

ticular sciences

have become

become

positive, the general science,

95 It
will
positive.

i.e.,

phi-

be able to
become the new spiritual power, which must remain separate from
the temporal power, since this is a division incapable of improvement. 96 With this organization of the "positive system" we shall have

losophy, will also

then at

last

epoch of human history of
which the first, or preliminary, was ended with Socrates while the
second or conjectural has lasted to the present. 97
This development of ideas which we can observe enables us to
98
Since "the cause which acts strongpredict their future movement.
definitely entered into the third great

THE "ACCOUCHEUR
est

on

society

is

" we

D'IDEES": HENRI

DE SAINT-SIMON

125

a change, a perfectioning of the ideas, the general

can do even more, we can develop a theory of history,
a general history of mankind, which will deal not merely with the
past and present but also with the future. Such an abridged history
of the past, future and present of the human mind Saint-Simon probeliefs,"

posed in the programme for the third memoir on the science of man.
"the happiest idea which has ever presented itself to his mind"
and he is "enchanted by the conception," 10 but for the moment he
develops it no further. As with most of his works before 1814, the
idea remained a promise of future things to come, a prospectus of
work he would like to do, but the Memoire itself is still an unorganized mass full of irrelevant detail and bizarre conceits from which one
can extract the fertile ideas only because one knows their later de-

It is

velopment.
5.

All this changed suddenly with Saint-Simon's next work, the

101
europeenne,
published in 1814. From
that date onwards there issued under his name a stream of books

Reorganization de

la societe

and pamphlets in which ideas were systematically expounded and
which sometimes were even well written. It is true that after a new
period of abject misery, during which he underwent a cure in what
looks suspiciously like a mental home, he was enabled to make a new
start. But the man of fifty-five was hardly likely to have suddenly
acquired the

gift

of lucid exposition. It

is difficult

to resist the belief

change had something to do with the fact that from that
date onwards he was able to secure the help of young collaborators
and that the influence of these young men went beyond matters of
mere exposition.
The first of these young helpers, who even appeared on the title
page of the Reorganization as his co-author and pupil, was the future
the same Thierry
historian Augustin Thierry, then 19 years of age
who was later to become the leader of the new schools of historians
who developed history as a history of the masses and of a struggle
of class interests and, in this, profoundly influencced Karl Marx. 102
The pamphlet on which he first collaborated with Saint-Simon
that the

is

not of great interest to us, although

celebrity for

its

it

has achieved a certain

advocacy of an Anglo-French Federation which,

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

126

after the

adherence of Germany, was to develop into a sort of Euro-

common parliament. The fall of the French
and
the
negotiations going on at Vienna made Saint-Simon
Empire
then apply his dominant idea of a reorganization of society to the
whole of Europe; but in the execution of the idea there was little of
the old Saint-Simon, except for occasional flights of fancy of which
pean Federation with a

the phrase "the golden age that is not behind us but in front of us
and that will be realized by the perfection of the social order" has
by its later use as a motto by the Saint-Simonians become widely

known. 103
collaboration of Saint-Simon and Thierry lasted about two
years. During the hundred days, they wrote first against Napoleon
and then against the Allies. The great Carnot, always one of Saint-

The

Simon's admirers and then temporarily returned to power, procured
Saint-Simon a sub-librarianship at the Arsenal, equally tem-

for

104

After Waterloo he fell for a brief period back into povBut he had now young friends among the new generation of
bankers and industrialists whose fortunes were rising, and it was to
them that he attached himself. The enthusiasm for industry was
porary.
erty.

henceforth to replace the enthusiasm for science; or, at least, as the
old love was not quite forgotten, he found a new force worthy to
exercise the temporal power at the side of science which was to wield
the spiritual power. And he found that the praise of industry was
better

rewarded than the appeals

to the scientists or the adulation of

the Emperor. Lafitte, governor of the Banque de France, was the
first to help. He procured for Saint-Simon the considerable sum of

10,000 francs per month, to
trie

littiraire

et scientifique

start

ligu

a

new

journal to be called

I'

Indus-

avec Vindustrie commerciale

et

manufacturere.

number of young men collected, and he
head of a school. At first the group consisted
largely of artists, bankers, and industrialists
among them some very
distinguished and influential men. There was even an economist
among the contributors to the first volume of I'lndustrie, St. Aubin,
although one whom J. B. Say unkindly described as the "clown of
political economy." He and Thierry appeared as the authors of the
discussions of Finance and Politics which filled the first volume of

Around

began

the

new

editor a

his career as the

THE "ACCOUCHEUR D'IDEES": HENRI DE SAINT-SIMON

127

To

the second volume, which appeared in 1817 under a
105
Saint-Simon himself contributed some conslightly changed title,
siderations on the relations between France and America.
I'

Industrie.

This essay is on the whole in the spirit of the liberal group for
Saint-Simon was then writing. 106 "The sole purpose towards
which all our thoughts and all our efforts ought to be directed, the

whom

organization of society most favourable to industry in the widest
sense of the term" is still best achieved by a political power which

does nothing except to see that "the workers are not disturbed" and
which arranges everything in such a way that all workers, whose
combined force forms the true society, are able to exchange directly,
107
complete freedom, the products of their various labors.
his attempt to base all politics on economic considerations as he
understands them, that is in fact on technological considerations,

and
But

in

began soon to lead him outside the views of his liberal friends. We
need only quote two of the "most general and most important truths"
to which his considerations lead: "1st The production of useful
is the only reasonable and positive end which politics can set
and the principle respect for production and the producers is
infinitely more fruitful than the principle respect for property and the
proprietors," and "7th. As the whole of mankind has a common purpose and common interests each man ought to regard himself in his

things

itself

engaged in a company of workers." "Politics,
in two words, is the science of production, that
the science which has for its object the order of things most

social relations

therefore, to
is,

as

sum up

We

are back at the ideas of
of production." 108
the Habitant de Geneve
and at the same time at the end of what

favorable to

all sorts

can be regarded as the independent development of Saint-Simon's
thought.

The beginning
first assistant.

of

someone"

defection of liberalism soon cost Saint-Simon his

"I cannot conceive of association without government
are reported to have been Saint-Simon's words in the

which Thierry replied that he "could not conceive of
association without liberty." 109 Soon this desertion by his assistant
was to be followed by a mass flight of his liberal friends. But this

final quarrel, to

came only

after a

new

assistant of great intellectual force

began

to

push Saint-Simon further along the road which he had only indi-

128

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

cated but had not had the power to follow. In the summer of 1817
the young polytechnician Auguste Comte, the first and greatest of the
host of engineers

who were

to recognize Saint-Simon as their master,

joined him

as secretary. Henceforth, to the death of Saint-Simon eight
the intellectual history of the two men is indissolubly
later,
years
fused. As we shall see in the next section, much of what is commonly

regarded as Saint-Simonian doctrine, and what through the SaintSimonians exercised a profound influence before Comte's public
career as a philosopher began,

was due

to

Auguste Comte.

Ill
SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON AND COMTE

1.

MORE

SURPRISING than anything else in Saint-Simon's career

the great fascination which towards the end of his life he exercised
on younger men, some of them intellectually his superiors, who yet

is

for years were satisfied to devil for him, to recognize him as their
leader and to bring coherence and order into the thoughts thrown
out by him, and whose whole intellectual careers were determind by

Of no one

is this more true than of Auguste Comte,
he may have said about "the unfortunate personal influence that overshadowed my earliest efforts" or the "de110
praved juggler," as whom he had come to regard Saint-Simon.

his influence.

whatever in later

life

It is a vain attempt to distinguish precisely what part of the work
of the period of seven years during which they collaborated is SaintSimon's and what is Comte's particularly as it seems likely that in

much more stimulating and inspiring
much confusion has been caused about

conversation Saint-Simon was

than in his writings. Yet so
the actual relationships

by some historians constantly

attributing to

Saint-Simon thoughts which occur first in works which appeared
under his name but are known to have been written by Comte, while
others have tried to vindicate Comte's complete independence of
thought, that we must exercise some care about what in
not be a matter of great consequence.

itself

may

Auguste Comte was nineteen years of age when in August, 1817,
Saint-Simon offered him the position of secretary. The young man
had little more than a year before been sent down from the Ecole
poly technique, after a brilliant career and just before the final examination, as the ring-leader in an insubordination. Since then he
had earned his living as a mathematical coach, at the same time pre129

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

130

paring himself for an appointment in America which did not materialize, and had translated a textbook on geometry from the English. During the same period he had steeped himself in the writings

Monge, of Montesquieu and Condorcet, and more
some interest in political economy.
had
taken
recently
This seems to have been the qualification on which Saint-Simon,
anxious to develop his "science of production," engaged him to write
the further parts of L 'Industrie. 111 In any case, the new disciple was
able to write in the three months or so during which he remained
of Lagrange and

Saint-Simon's paid secretary the whole of the four parts of the third
and the first and only part of the fourth volume of that publication.

112

On

the whole his contribution

trines of his

is

merely a development of the doc-

new master which the disciple pushes somewhat further
The third volume is largely devoted to

to their logical conclusions.

problems of the philosophy of history, the gradual transition from
polytheism to the positive era, from the absolute monarchy through
the transitory stage of the parliamentary liberal state to the new positive organization, and, above all, from the old "celestial" to the new

and positive morals. 113 Only now are we able to watch
these transitions because we have learned to understand the laws to
which they are subject. 114 All the institutions existing at any time,
being an application of the ruling social philosophy, have their relative justification. 115 And anticipating one of the main features of his
later philosophy, Comte sums up in the only sentence of this early
work which he would later acknowledge: "There is nothing good and
nothing bad absolutely speaking; everything is relative, this is the
terrestrial

116
only absolute statement."
No less alarming to Saint-Simon's supporters than the praise of

morals" were the "Views on property and legislation"
contained in volume four of L'Industrie. Although in general still
"terrestrial

(and consciously Benthamite

117

mainly

utilitarian

)

in its insistence

on the

variability of the contents of property rights

and the need to

118
adapt them to the conditions of the time,

it

is

and

it

strikes a

new note

in

while parliamentary government is merely a form,
the constitution of property which is the fundamental thing,

emphasizing
that

it is

that,

therefore "this Constitution which

is

the real basis of the

SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON
social edifice" lld

AND COMTE

implying that with the revision of the law of prop-

120
erty the whole social order can be changed.
The third volume of L' Industrie was hardly completed

of

liberal

its

131

supporters withdrew from

it

after

when most

a public protest

against the incursion of the journal into a field outside its professed
program and against its advocacy of principles "which were de-

and incompatible with liberty." 121 Although Saint-Simon attempted a lame apology in the introduction of
the fourth volume and promised to return to the original plan, the
first issue of the new volume was also the last. The funds were exhausted and L'Industrie, and with it Comte's paid position, came to
an end.
structive of all social order

2.

Comte

continued, however, to collaborate with Saint-Simon in

the various journalistic enterprises which the latter undertook during the next few years. His enthusiasm for his master was still un-

diminished. Saint-Simon

is

"the most excellent

"most estimable and lovable of men,"

to

whom

man he knows,"

the

he has sworn eternal

122

friendship.
Politique,

At the next attempt at a journalistic enterprise, the
COmte becomes a partner and shareholder with Saint-

Simon. 123

It is just one of the numerous liberal journals which in
these years sprung up and died like mushrooms; but even its strongly
liberal views, the advocacy by Comte of economy and the freedom

of the press, did not secure it a life of more than five months. But
three months after its death, in September, 1819, Saint-Simon, again
with Comte's support, started another and more characteristic or124

which contains perhaps the most remarkable of Saint-Simon's
writings, the Organisateur, whose very name was a program. It
was certainly the first of his publications which attracted wide attention inside and outside France and which made him generally known
gan,

as a social reformer.

This is probably due more than anything else to the prosecution
which he drew on himself by the celebrated Parable with which the
new publication opens. In it Saint-Simon first shows that if France
were suddenly deprived of the fifty chief scientists in each field, of
the fifty chief engineers, artists, poets, industrialists, bankers and
artisans of various kinds, her very life and civilization would be de-

132

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

stroyed.

He

then contrasts this with the case of a similar misfortune

befalling a corresponding number of persons of the aristocracy, of
dignitaries of state, of courties and of members of the high clergy,

and points out how

little

difference this

would

really

make

to the

125
But although the best known, the parable is
prosperity of France.
means
the
most
no
interesting part of the Organisateur. To do
by
to
its
he
title,
justice
presents for the first time in a series of letters

a real plan for the reorganization of society, or at least a plan
for a reorganization of the political system which would give
all social activity the scientific direction which it needs. 120 While
his starting-point is now the English parliamentary system, which is
the best system yet invented, his problem is how this system can be
transformed into something resembling his Council of Newton of
sixteen years before. The direction must be placed in the hands of
the "industrialists," 127 that is, all those who do productive work.
They are to be organized in three separate bodies. The first, the
chambre d' invention, 128 is to consist of 200 engineers and 100
"artists" (poets, writers, painters, sculptors, architects and musicians) and would have to draw up the plans for public undertakings.

The chambre

d' examination, consisting of 100 each of biologists,
and mathematicians, would have to scrutinize and approve
these plans. The chambre d'execution, consisting entirely of the
richest and most successful entrepreneurs, would watch over the ex-

physicists

ecution of these works.

Among

the

first

tasks of the

new parliament

would be the reconstitution of the law of property, which "must be
founded on a basis most favorable to production." 129

The new system

will

come not

only because

its

inherent advan-

be generally recognized, but, even more important, because it is the necessary outcome of the course which the advance
of civilization has taken during the last seven hundred years. 130 This
but the result of the scientific
proves that his plan is not a Utopia
tages will

m

treatment of history, of a true history of the whole of civilization, as
it, which will enable us to continue on the pre-

Condorcet conceived

destined route with open eyes. 132
As an "example of how industry ought to be conceived" 133 SaintSimon then inserts two letters (the 8th and 9th) which, as we now

know, were written by Comte, who

later republished

them under

his

SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON AND

COMTE

133

own name. 184 The most

important parts of these are the brief passages elucidating Saint-Simon's suggestion that the rise of the new
system is the necessary result of the law of progress: "At no period

has the progress of society been regulated by a system conceived
by a man of genius and adopted by the masses. This would, from
the nature of things, be impossible, for the law of human progress
guides and dominates

we can do

all;

men

are only

its

instruments." Therefore,

consciously to obey this law, which constitutes our
true providence, ascertaining the course it marks out for us, instead
of being blindly impelled by it. Here in truth lies the goal of the
"all

is

135
For the rest, and
grand philosophic revolution for our own times."
contribution
still
Comte's
contains
few
ideas
which cannot
although
be found in Saint-Simon's earlier work, these are now presented with
a terseness and force of which the latter was never capable. We find

now even more

placed on the need for the "scientific and posi-

stress

tive capacity" to replace the old spiritual

136

power,

the

same exposi-

tion of the successive advances of science towards the positive stage
till at last philosophy, morals and politics also reach it and thereby

make

new

137

and the
same impatience with the freedom of thought which is the denial of a
138
New is the special emphasis on the role of the new
spiritual power.
the

scientifically directed social

system possible,

which occupies an intermediate position between the men of
and the artisans, that of Engineers," which symbolizes the new union between the spiritual and temporal capacities;
a union which "prepares the way for this joint direction of soci13d Under their direction
the whole of society will be organized
ety."
"class

science, the artists,

to "act

upon nature"

as

this joint enterprise the

it is

now

people

organized in

will

its

no longer be

separate parts.

140

In

subjects but associ-

ates or partners, 141 and for the first time we find the suggestion that
there will then no longer be any need of "government" but merely

of "administration."

To Comte's

142

contribution Saint-Simon merely added at the end of

the second letter a characteristic appeal to the scientists and in
particular to the artists, who, as the true "engineers of the soul" as

Lenin

later described

them, are to use

"to exercise on the common mass

the forces of imagination
sufficient action to determine them
all

to follow irrevocably in the direction indicated

and to

assist their

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

134

a first indication of the
natural leaders in that great co-operation"
Saint-Simonian theories about the social function of art. 143

later

In the further description of the working of his

new

organization,

Saint-Simon rises to an eloquence unknown to him before. "In the
new political order the social organization will have for its sole and

permanent purpose the best possible use for the satisfaction of human
needs of all the knowledge acquired in the sciences, the fine arts, and
144
and the increase of that knowledge. He does not stop
industry"
to describe in detail "the astonishing degree of prosperity to which
145
While, so far, men
society can aspire with such an organization."
have applied to nature only their isolated forces and even mutually
counteracted their efforts in consequence of the division of mankind
into unequal parts of which the smaller has always used all its
power to dominate the other, men will cease to command each other

and
is

will organize to

required

is

apply to nature their combined efforts. All that
vague ends which our social sys-

that in the place of the

tem now serves a

positive social purpose should be decided

upon:

"In a society which

is organised for the positive purpose of increasing
prosperity by means of science, art, and craftsmanship, the most important political act, that of determining the direction in which the community is to move, is no longer performed by men invested with social
functions but by the body politic itself; ... the aim and purpose of such
an organisation are so clear and determined that there is no longer any

its

men or even of laws, because both can exist only
so to speak, their natural, element. The actions of
government that consist in commands will be reduced to nil or practically
nil. All the questions that will have to be solved in such a political system,
namely: By what enterprises can the community increase its present prosperity, making use of a given knowledge in science, in art, and in industry?
By what measures can such knowledge be dispersed and brought to the
room

for arbitrariness of

in the vague,

which

is,

furthest possible perfection? And finally by what means can these enterall these
prises be carried out at a minimum cost and in minimum time?

questions, I contend, and all those to which they can give rise, are eminently positive and soluble. The decisions must be the result of scientific
demonstrations totally independent of human will, and they will be subject
to discussion by all those sufficiently educated to understand them. .
Just as every question of social importance will necessarily be solved as
well as the existing state of knowledge permits, so will all social functions
necessarily be entrusted to those men who are most capable of exercising
them in conformity with the general aims of the community. Under such
.

.

SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON
an order we

shall then see the disappearance of the three

tages of the present political system, that
146
intrigue."

How

AND COMTE

is,

135

main disadvanand

arbitrariness, incapacity

perfectly this describes the beautiful illusions that ever since

Saint-Simon's times have seduced scientifically trained minds! And
yet how obvious it is to us now, even in this first formulation, that
it is

tific

a delusion; that the idea is based on an extension of the scienand enigneering technique far beyond the field to which they are

appropriate. Saint-Simon is fully conscious of the significance of his
ambitions; he knows that his way of treating the problem of social

organization "exactly in the
tific

questions"

is

new. 147

intention d'imprimer

Yet

au

same manner

And how

XIX6

as

one

treats other scien-

well has he succeeded in his

siecle le caractere organisateur! 148

with his appeals. It is the Bourbon King
that he hopes will place himself at the head of the new movement
and thereby not only meet all the dangers which threaten his house
at first

he again

fails

at the time, but also place

France in the front of the march of

Beside the glory which the Bourbons can acquire by
social reforms even the fame of Bonaparte will pale. 149 But the only
civilization.

response
of the

is

a prosecution as a moral accomplice in the assassination
150
since in his Parable he had incited the people
Berry,

Due de

do away with the nobility. Although in the end he was acquitted,
the proceedings serving only to stimulate interest in the editor of the
Organisateur, the journal did not survive this crisis. Saint-Simon's
to

funds were once again exhausted, and after a new appeal to all those
feel in themselves the vocation to develop the philosophy of the

who

nineteenth century and to subscribe as jondateurs de la politique positive, also failed, this enterprise too came to an end.
3.

Saint-Simon's next two major publications, although his most
main only elaborations of the ideas

substantial works, are in the

sketched in the Organisateur.

We

more and more in the direction
was to take definite form only

can watch, however,

how he moves

of that authoritarian socialism which
after his death in the

hands of his

151
really
pupils. In the exposition of his Systeme industriel (182 1)
from
come
than
that
had
his
more systematic
yet
pen his
anything
main theme is the "measures finally to terminate the revolution." He

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

136

no longer attempts to conceal his dislike for the principles of liberty
and for all those who by defending it stand in the way of the realization of his plans. "The vague and metaphysical idea of liberty" "im152
and is "conpedes the action of the masses on the individual"
of a
to
and
to
the
the
of
civilization
organization
trary
development
well-ordered system." 153 The theory of the rights of men 154 and the
critical work of the lawyers and metaphysicians have served well
enough to destroy the feudal and theological system and to prepare
the industrial and scientific one. Saint-Simon sees more clearly
than most socialists after him that the organization of society for a
155

common

which is fundamental to all socialist systems, is
purpose,
with
individual
freedom and requires the existence of a
incompatible
spiritual

power which can "choose the

forces are to be applied." 156

The

or parliamentary system"

tive,

is

direction to

which the national

existing "constitutional, representa-

a mongrel system that uselessly pro-

156
longs the existence of anti-scientific and anti-industrial tendencies
because it allows different ends to compete. The philosophy that

and the positive scientists 159 who
are able to base scientific policy on co-ordinated series of historical
160
are still to provide the spiritual power. Much more space,
facts,
studies the

however,

march of

now

is

the industrialists

civilization,

158

given to the organization of the temporal power by
a theme which is further developed in the Gate-

chisme des Industries (1823). 161

To
tional

entrust the entrepreneurs with the task of preparing the nabudget and therefore with the direction of the national ad-

means of securing for the mass of the people
162
The indusemployment and the best livelihood.
trialists, by the nature of their various works, form a natural hierarchy and they ought to organize into one big corporation which will
enable them to act in concert for the achievement of their political
ministration

the

is

maximum

interests. 163

tions

know

the best

of

In this hierarchy the bankers, who from their occupathe relations between the different industries, are in the

best position to co-ordinate the efforts of the different industries, and
the biggest banking houses in Paris, by their central position, are
called

upon

to exercise the central direction of the activities of all

industrialists. 168

tive

workers

is

But while the
to

be

in the

direction of the

work of

all

produc-

hands of the entrepreneurs as their nat-

SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON

AND COMTE

137

ural leaders, they are to use their powers in the interests of the poorand most numerous classes; 164 the subsistence of the proletarians
must be secured by the provision of work for the fit and by the support

est

of the invalids. 165 In the one great factory which France will become,
a new kind of freedom will exist: with the formula which Friedrich

Engels was later to

new and

make famous, we

definite organization,

which

are promised that under the
the final destiny of man-

is

166

the governmental or military organization will be replaced by
the administrative or industrial. 167 The obstacle to this re-organiza-

kind,

and the clergy, the lawyers and the metaphysicand the military and the proprietors who represent the two past
The bourgeois, who have made the revolution and destroyed

tion are the nobles
ians,

eras.

the exclusive privilege of the nobility to exploit the wealth of the
nation, have now merged into one class with the latter, and there are
168
In the political struggle for the right to
only two classes left.
which
has
continued
since the revolution, the industrialists,
exploit,

now
that

is, all

those

who work, have

not yet really taken part. But

"the producers are not interested in whether they are pillaged by one class
or another. It is clear that the struggle must in the end become one between the whole mass of the parasites and the whole mass of the producers till it is decided whether the latter will continue to be the prey of
the former or whether they will obtain the supreme direction of a society
of which they form already by far the largest part. This question must be
decided as soon as it is put directly and plainly, considering the immense
superiority of power of the producers over the non-producers.
The moment when this struggle must assume its true character has
actually arrived. The party of the producers will not hesitate to show
itself. And even among the men whom birth has placed in the class of
parasites, those who excel by the width of their views and the greatness
of their souls begin to feel that the only honorable role which they can
play is to stimulate the producers to enter into political life, and to help
them to obtain in the direction of the common affairs the preponderance
169
they have already obtained in society."
4.

To

the Cattchisme des Industriels, which

was

to spread these

doctrines further, Auguste Comte contributed the third part, a substantial volume called a Plan for the Scientific Operations necessary

by

its

170

and two years later (1824) republished
author under the even more anmbitious title System of Post-

for Re-organizing Society,

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

138

"a title premature indeed, but rightly indicating the
live Policy
171
It is the most
scope" of his labors, as Comte said thirty years later.
significant single tract of the whole body of literature with which we
are here concerned.

In this

first

form the "positive system"

further his hatred of the
is

the great obstacle to

more than a brilComte here carries still

is little

172
liant restatement of Saint-Simon's doctrine.

of the liberty of conscience, which
173
Just as in astronomy,
reorganization.

dogma

physics, chemistry, and physiology there is no such thing as liberty
of conscience, 174 so this transitory fact will disappear once politics
has been elevated to the rank of a natural science and the true and
final doctrine

has been definitely established. 175 This

Social Physics, that
of the human race,

man

conceived in

is

is

its

new

science of

to say, the study of the collective development
really a branch of physiology, or the study of
entire extension. In other words, the history

nothing but the indispensable result and complement of of the natural history of man." 176 Politics is thus on the

of civilization

is

point of becoming a positive science in accordance with the law of
the three stages, which is now pronounced in its final form: "Each

branch of knowledge

is

necessarily obliged to pass through three
the Theological or fictitious state; the

different theoretical states:

Metaphysical or abstract
the definite state of all

state; lastly the Scientific or positive state,"

177
knowledge whatsoever.

The object of social physics is to discover the natural and unavoidable laws of the progress of civilization which are as necessary as
that of gravitation. 178 By civilization Comte means "the development
of the human mind and its result, the increasing power of man over

nature," the ways in which he has learned to act
ify

it

to his

own

advantage.

179

upon nature

to

mod-

It is civilization in this sense, that is

the state of Science, Fine Arts, and Industry, which determines and
180
Social physics, which,
regulates the course of Social Organization.
like all science, aims at prevision, enables us by observing the past
to determine the social system which the progress of civilization tends
to realize in our own day. 181 The superiority of positive politics consists in

the fact that

it

discovers what

is

made

necessary by these nat-

ural laws while other systems invent. 182 All that remains for us to do
is to help into life the positive
system which the course of civilization

SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON

AND COMTE

139

tends to produce, and we are certain to secure the best system now
obtainable if we discover that which is most in harmony with the
183
present state of civilization.
It will be noticed how close Comte's view on the philosophy of history, which is commonly regarded as the opposite of a "materialist"

interpretation,

comes

to that view

particularly

if

we remember

the

exact meaning which he gives to the term civilization. In fact, what
anticipation of the materialist interpretation of history can be found
in the Saint-Simonian writings
and we believe that they are the
main source of that doctrine can be traced directly to this and some
of the earlier works of Comte. 184

Although soon

after the publication of the

Catechisme des Indus-

Comte was

triels

began

finally to break with Saint-Simon when the latter
to turn his doctrine into a religion, the next two works which

Comte published

shortly
185

after

Saint-Simon's death in the Saint-

common line of thought.
of interest mainly for the more careful analysis
of the progress towards the positive method. He shows how man
"necessarily begins by regarding all the bodies which attract his atSimonian Producteur

The

first

of these

still

continue the

is

as so many beings animated with a life resembling his
186
and it is interesting that at this stage Comte, who only a
own,"
few years later was to deny the possibility of all introspection, 187 was
still explaining this by the fact that "the personal action exerted by
man on other beings is the only kind of which he comprehends the
modus operandi through his consciousness of it." 188 But already he
is on the way to denying the legitimacy of the disciplines which are
based precisely on this knowledge. His attacks now aim not merely

tention

at the "revolting monstrosity," the anti-social

dogma

of the liberty

of conscience, 189 and the anarchy of unregulated individualism gen190 but
are already more specifically directed against the teacherally,
191
of
ings
political economy.
Only by historical considerations can

be explained how that "strange phenomenon," the idea that a so192
ciety ought not to be consciously organized, could ever have arisen.
But as "everything that develops spontaneously is necessarily legitimate during a certain period," 193 so the Critical Doctrine has had a
relative justification during the past. But a perfect social order can
be established only if we can in all cases "assign to every individual
it

140

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

or nation that precise kind of activity for which they are respectively
But this presupposes a spiritual power, a moral code, of

fitted."

m

which again Comte cannot conceive except as deliberately constructed. 195 The necessary moral order can therefore be created only
by a Government of Opinion which determines "the entire system
of ideas and habits necessary for initiating individuals into the social
order under which they must live." 196 The ideas, which, after he had
allowed himself for twenty years to be deeply influenced by Comte,
finally so revolted J. S. Mill that he described them as "the completest system of spiritual and temporal despotism which ever yet emanated from a human brain, unless possibly that of Ignatius
197
were present in Comte's thoughts from the beginning.
Loyola,"
are
a
They
necessary consequence of the whole system of thought
which not only J. S. Mill, but the whole world, has taken over from
Comte.
5.
life.

There is little more to say about the last phase of Saint-Simon's
While the Catechisme des Industriels was in the process of pub-

lication,

a

new

financial crisis in his affairs threatened

tried to

and early
blow out his

inflicted

wound

starvation,

in

1823 the old man, now

him again with

really discouraged,

brains. He recovered, however, from the selfwith the loss of one eye, and soon assistance came

time wealthy pupil. The young
Ecole Poly technique, Olinde
Rodrigues, not only provided for Saint-Simon's necessities during the
last two years of his life, but also became the center of the little

from a new, enthusiastic, and
banker and former instructor

this

at the

group which after his death developed into the Ecole Scdnt-Simonien.
He was soon joined by the poet L6on Halevy, the physiologist Dr.
Bailly, the lawyer Duveyrier and others. With them Saint-Simon prepared the Opinions litteraires, philosophiques et industrielles (1825)
in which the banker, the poet and the physiologist each elaborated
the parts of the doctrine of the master for which they possessed specompetence. Only a little later in the same year appeared the

cial

work of Saint-Simon, marking the final phase of his work, the
Nouveau Christianisme.
Already for some time Saint-Simon had shown an increasing tendency away from the narrowly "scientific" and towards a more myslast

SOCIAL PHYSICS: SAINT-SIMON AND

COMTE

141

and religious form of his doctrine. This had indeed been the
cause of the estrangement between him and Comte, who, however, was to undergo a similar change towards the end of his own
tical

final

career. In Saint-Simon's case this

development

is

partly a return to

his first ideas.

Since the great schism at the time of the reformation, he argues,

none of the Christian churches represents true Christianity. They
have all neglected the fundamental precept that men should behave
as brothers towards each other. The main object of true Christianity
must be "the speediest improvement of the moral and the physical
existence of the poorest class"
a phrase which appears on almost
of
the
brochure
which
and
became the watchword of the
every page
Saint-Simonian group. Since the churches have made no use of their
opportunity to improve the lot of the poor by the teaching and encouragement of the arts and the organization of industry, the Lord
is now addressing the people and the princes through His new
prophet. He undertakes to reconstruct theology, which from time to
time needs to be renewed, just as physics, chemistry and physiology
must be periodically re-written. 198 The new theology will pay more
attention to the terrestrial interests of man. All that is required is an
organization of industry that will assure a great amount of work of
the kind which will secure the quickest advance of human intelligence.

now that the extent of our planet
the scholars, the artists and the industrialists draw up a
general plan of the works which must be carried out in order that the
terrestrial possessions of the human race be put to the most produc"You can

is

known,

tive

create such conditions;

let

use and

made

the

most agreeable

199
to inhabit in all respects."

Saint-Simon survived the appearance of the Nouveau Christianisme by only a few weeks. He died in May, 1825, at the age of 65,
calmly expecting his death while discussing future projects with the
group of pupils that now surrounded him. The life that had been an
example of the precepts he had laid down for all future sociologists,
"passing through
the greatest
for oneself
fore,"

20

classes of society, putting oneself personally in
of different social positions, and even creating
others relationships which have never existed beall

number

and
ended in peace, tolerable comfort and even

a considerable reputation.

in possession of

142

The

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE
funeral re-united the older pupils like Thierry and Comte
new ones. The old Saint-Simon had just seen die beginnings

with the

of the school that under his

name was

of ideas derived from his work.

It is

to spread far and wide a body
to them that he has become

due

a figure of considerable importance in the history of social ideas.
While he was certainly an original, he was scarcely an original or
profound thinker. The ideas which he bequeathed to his pupils were
unquestionably held by many people at the time. But by his persistence and enthusiasm he gained adherents for them among men who

were capable of developing them and in whom he inspired sufficient
enthusiasm to act as a body in spreading them. As one of his French
biographers has said, his role was de jaire flamboyer les idees comme
des reclames lumineuses. 201

He

has performed

it

to perfection.

IV
THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS:
ENFANTIN AND THE SAINT SIMONIANS
1.

Less than a month after Saint-Simon's death his friends and

disciples constituted themselves into a formal association in order to

realize the project of another journal

with them.

which he

The Producteur, which appeared

still

in six

had discussed
in 1825

volumes

and 1826, was edited by the group under the leadership of Olinde
Rodrigues, with the collaboration of Auguste Comte and some others
who were not strictly members. Soon another young engineer, who
had seen Saint-Simon only once when Rodrigues introduced him, was
to become the outstanding figure of the group and the editor of its
journal.

Barth61emy-Prosper Enfantin was the son of a banker.

He had

entered the Ecole Poly technique but had left it in 1814, two years
before Comte, and, like him, without completing the course. He had

some years traveling and working in
and
had
and
Russia,
Germany
recently devoted some time to the
of
and
study
political economy
particularly to the works of Jeremy
Bentham. Although his education as an engineer had remained insince entered business, spent

complete, or perhaps because of this, his belief in the unlimited powers of the mathematical and technical sciences remained one of the

most

make-up. As he exhave found the words probabilities,

characteristic features of his intellectual

plained on one occasion, "when

I

logarithm, asymptote, I am happy, because I have regained the road
me to formulas and forms." 202 An uncommonly hand-

which leads

some man according to the views of his contemporaries, he seems to
have possessed great personal charm, which made it possible for him
gradually to swing the entire Saint-Simonian movement in the direc143

144

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

tion into

which

his sentimental

and mystical bent led him. But he also

commanded considerable powers of intellect which enabled him
make important contributions before Saint-Simonism passed from
philosophical to
It

its

religious phase.

to
its

203

has been said, with some truth, that Saint-Simonism was born
death. 204

However pregnant in suggestions
Saint-Simon's writings were, he never achieved a coherent system. It
is probably also true that the
very obscurity of his writings was one
after

Saint-Simon's

of the greatest incentives for his disciples to develop his doctrines
why the importance of the joint efforts of

further. It also explains

Saint-Simon and his pupils has rarely been properly appreciated. The
natural tendency of those who have recognized it has been to ascribe
too much to Saint-Simon himself. Others, who have been led by this
to study Saint-Simon's own writings, have been bound to turn away
disappointed. Although almost all ideas of the School can be found
in the works that have appeared in Saint-Simon's

somewhere

205 the real force which
name,
decisively influenced European thought
were the Saint-Simonians and not Saint-Simon himself. And we
must never forget that the greatest of the Saint-Simonians in their
early years, and the medium through whom many of them had received the doctrine of the master, 206 was Auguste Comte, who, as
we know, still contributed to the Producteur, although he was no
longer a member of the group and soon broke off all relations with
it.

The new

journal had for its expressed purpose "to develop and
the
expand
principles of a philosophy of human nature based on the
recognition that the destiny of our race is to exploit and modify
2.

its greatest advantage," and it believed that this
could best be done by "incessantly extending association, one of the
most powerful means at its command." 207 In order to attract the

external nature to

general public the programmatic articles were interspersed with others
on technological or statistical subjects, which were often written by
outsiders. But most of the journal was written by the little group of
disciples. There can also be little doubt that, even during the year
when the Producteur was the center of their activities, Enfantin had
already the largest share in the development of the doctrines of the

THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS

145

school, although for some time his position was equaled or even
overshadowed by the powerful personality of another new recruit,

Saint-Amand Hazard. 208

Slightly older than

Rodrigues or Enfantin,
of the French Carbonari movement, an experienced revolutionary, he joined the collaborators of the Producteur, who already had attracted some old Babouvists and Carbonaris.

and, as a former

member

But although

these, and Bazard in particular, played an important
in
part
leading the Saint-Simonians towards more radical views, it is
probable that the latter's doctrinal contributions are usually over-

rated and that his role

temporary who

more appropriately described by a con"M. Enfantin found the ideas, M. Bazard

is

said that

formulated them. 209 Bazard's

an even

articles in the Producteur, apart
fiercer hatred of the liberty of conscience 21 than had

from
been

shown by Saint-Simon or even Comte, add little that is new. The
same is true of most of the other contributors except Enfantin and,
of course, Comte, although the elaboration of the Saint-Simonian
doctrine of the social function of art by Leon HalSvy must not be

overlooked.

He

sees the time approaching

when

the "art of

moving

the masses" will be so perfectly developed that the painter, the musician, and the poet "will possess the power to please and to move
with the same certainty as the mathematician solves a geometrical

problem or the chemist analyzes some substance. Then only will the
moral side of society be firmly established." 211 The word propaganda was not yet used in this connection, but the art of the modern
Ministries of Propaganda would have been fully appreciated and these
institutions were even foreseen by the Saint-Simonians.
Important developments occur in the economic articles which En-

The growth of nearly all the
of the social doctrine of the Saint-Simonians, which we

fantin contributed to the Producteur.

new elements

shall meet presently in
can be traced in these

their final

form

in the celebrated Exposition,

The

general interest in the problems
of industrial organization, the enthusiasm for the new growth of jointstock companies, the doctrine of general association, the increasing
articles.

doubts about the usefulness of private property and of

interest, the

banks all
and more
to
be
content
must here
quote two sen-

plans for the direction of all economic activity by the
these ideas were gradually worked out and were more
strongly emphasized.

We

146

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

tences particularly characteristic of his approach to the problems.
One ridicules the idea that "a human society could exist without an
intelligence

directs it." 212

which

The

other describes the concepts

formed the preoccupation of political economy,
"value,
namely
price, and production, which do not contain any conwhich have so

far

structive idea for the composition or organisation of society," as "irrelevant details." 213

The Producteur, which had appeared first weekly, and then
monthly, came to an end in October, 1826. While this meant the ces3.

sation for three years of all public activity of the group, there had
already been created a common doctrine which could serve as the
basis for intensive
that they

had

propaganda by word of mouth.

their first great successes

among

It

was

at this time

the students of the

Ecole Poly technique, to which they specially directed their efforts.
As Enfantin later expressed it: "The Ecole Poly technique must be
the channel through which our ideas will spread through society. It
is the milk which we have sucked at our beloved School which must
It is there that we have learnt the
and the methods of research and demonstration
which today secure the advance of the political sciences." 214 The
success of these efforts was such that within a few years the group
consisted of some hundred engineers with only a sprinkling of doctors and a few artists and bankers, who were mostly left over from
Saint-Simon's immediate disciples, or, like the brothers Pereire, the
cousins of Rodrigues, or his friend Gustave d'Eichthal, were per-

nourish the generations to come.

positive language

sonally related to them.
Among the first of the

young engineers to join the movement were
the two friends Abel Transon and Jules Lechevalier, 215 who through
their knowledge of German philosophy helped to give the SaintSimonian doctrines a certain Hegelian veneer which
important in helping their success in

Germany.

A

later

proved so

short time after

followed Michel Chevalier, later famous as an economist, and Henri
Fournel, who, to join the movement, resigned a position as director

became Saint-Simon's biographer.
never a pupil of the Ecole Polyhimself
Hippolyte Carnot, although
technique, since he had spent his youth with his father in exile, must
of the Creuzot works and later

THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS

147

also be counted with this group, not only as the son of Lazare, but
still more as the brother of the
polytechnician Sadi Carnot, the

"founder of the science of energy," discoverer of the "Carnot cycle,"
the ideal of technical efficiency, with whom he lived in these years
while the latter developed his famous theories and at the same time
preserved a lively although never active interest in the political and
social discussions of his friends. 216 At least by tradition and connections,

not by training, Hippolyte Carnot was as

if

much an

engineer

as the others.

For a time the apartment of the Carnots was the place where Enand Hazard taught an ever increasing number of young enthusiasts. 217 But towards the end of 1828 they had outgrown that
accommodation and it was decided that a more formal oral exposi-

fantin

tion of their views should

be given

to a larger audience. It

is

probable

was suggested by the success of a similar experiment by
in 1826 had begun to expound his Positive Philosophy
who
Comte,
that this

to a distinguished audience, including, besides such scholars as Alexander von Humboldt and Poinsot, also Carnot, who had been sent

there by Enfantin to receive his
ism. 218 Although Comte's attempt

mental

affliction

first

instruction in Saint-Simon-

had soon been cut short by the
which interrupted his work for three years, it had

attracted sufficient attention to invite imitation.

The course of lectures which the Saint-Simonians arranged in
1829 and 1830, in the form in which it has come down to us as the
two parts of the Doctrine de Saint-Simon, Exposition, 21 * is by far the
most important document produced by Saint-Simon or his pupils and
one of the great landmarks in the history of socialism which deserves
to be much better known than it is outside France. If it is not the
Bible of Socialism, as it has been called by a French scholar, 220 it
deserves at least to be regarded as its Old Testament. And in some
respects it did indeed carry socialist thought further than was done
for nearly a hundred years after its publication.
4.

As

Exposition

most

one of the foundations of collectivist thought, the
the product of no single man. Although Bazard, as the

befits
is

skillful

content was

speaker, delivered the majority of the lectures, their
the result of discussion among the group. The published

148

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

were actually written by H. Carnot from notes taken by him
and others during the lectures, and it is presumably to him that the
Exposition owes its elegance and power. An important supplement
to it are the five lectures on the Saint-Simonian religion which Abel
Transon delivered about the same time to the students of the Ecole
221
and which are appended to some of the editions of
Polytechnique
texts

the Exposition.
It is difficult without tiresome repetition to give an adequate idea
of this most comprehensive expression of Saint-Simonian thought,
since much of it is of course a more or less faithful reproduction of

we have already met. It is, however, not merely, as it claims to
the
sole publication in which the whole of the contribution of
be,
Saint-Simon (and, we should add, the young Comte) has been
views

brought into a comprehensive system; but it also develops it further,
and it is these developments by Enfantin and his friends which we

must mainly consider.

A large part

of the

more important

first

volume of the Exposition

given to a broad philosophic survey of history and of the "law of
222
development of humanity revealed to the genius of Saint-Simon,"
is

223
which, based on the study of mankind as a "collective being,"
224
shows us with certainty what its future will be.
This law asserts

in the first instance the alternation of organic and critical states, in
the former of which "all aspects of human activity are ordered, foreseen and co-ordinated by a general theory," while in the critical

an agglomeration of isolated individuals struggling
The final destiny towards which we are tending
is a state where all antagonism between men will have entirely disappeared and the exploitation of men by men is replaced by their joint
and harmonic action upon nature. 226 But this definite state, where
states society is

225
against each other.

the "systematisation of effort," 227 the "organisation of labor" 228 for
a common purpose 22d is perfected, is reached only in stages. The
basic fact of the ever decreasing antagonism between men, which will

lead in the end to the "universal association," 230 implies a "steady
diminution of the exploitation of men by men"
a phrase which

forms the leitmotif of the whole Exposition. 2 * 1 While the positive
advance towards the universal association is marked by the stages of
the family, town, nation,

and the federation of nations having a com-

THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS

mon

creed and church, 232 the decrease of exploitation

the changing relations between the classes.

From

is

the stage

149

shown by
when can-

nibalism was practiced on the captive, through slavery and serfdom
to the present relations between proletarians and proprietors, there

has been a constant decrease of the degree of exploitation. 233 But

men

divided into two classes, the exploiters and the exploited. 234
There is still a class of disinherited proletarians. 235 As the eloquent
are

still

Abel Transon put it to the young polytechnicians in a passage of his
which better than anything in the Exposition sums up the
main argument:

lectures

"The peasant or craftsman

is no longer attached to the man or to the
not subjected to the whip like the slave; he owns a greater part
of his labor than the serf, but still, the law is cruel at his expense. All the
fruit of his labor does not belong to him. He has to share it with other
people who are not useful to him either by their knowledge or by their
power. In short, there are no masters for him nor lords, but there are
BOURGEOIS, and so that's what a BOURGEOIS is.
"As the owner of land and capital the bourgeois disposes of these at
his will and does not place them in the hands of the workers except on
condition that he receive a premium from the price of their work, a
premium that will support him and his family. Whether a direct heir of
the man of conquest or else an emancipated son of the peasant class, this
difference of origin merges into the common character which I have just
described; only in the first case is the title of his possession based on a

soil,

he

is

which is now condemned, on the action of the sword; in the second
case the origin is more honorable, it is the work of industry. But in the
eyes of the future this title is in either case illegitimate and without value
because it hands over to the mercy of a privileged class all those whose

fact

fathers have not left

The cause
property,

of this

the

them any instruments of production."
still

236

existing state of affairs is the "constitution of
of wealth by inheritance within the

transmission

237
But the institution of "property is a social fact, subject,
family."
as all other social facts, to the law of progress." 238 According to the

Exposition the

new order

will

be created by

"the transfer to the State, which will become an association of workers,
of the right of inheritance which to-day is confined to the members of the
family. The privileges of birth which have already received such heavy
blows in so many respects must entirely disappear." 289

150

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

"If, as we proclaim, humanity moves toward a state where all the individuals will be classed according to their capacities and remunerated
according to their work, its is evident that the right of property, as it
exists, must be abolished, because, by giving to a certain class of men the

possibility to live on the work of others and in complete idleness, it preserves the exploitation of one part of the population, the most useful one,
that which works and produces, in favor of those who only destroy." 24

They explain that to them land and labor are merely "instruments
are the depositaries
of work; and the proprietors and capitalists
of these instruments; their function 241 is to distribute them among
.

the workers." 242

But they perform

this

.

.

function very inefficiently.

The Saint-Simonians had studied Sismondi's Nouveaux principes
d economic politique which in 1826 had appeared in a new edition,
f

which the author for the first time describes how the ravages of
economic crises were caused by "chaotic competition." But while
Sismondi had no real remedy to propose and later seems even to have
243
the Saint-Simonians had one.
deplored the effects of his teaching,
in

Their description of the defects of competition
taken from Sismondi:

is

almost entirely

"In the present state of affairs, where the distribution [of the instruments of production] is effected by the capitalists and proprietors, none
of these functions is performed except after much groping, experimenting,
and many unfortunate experiences; and even so the result obtained is
always imperfect, always temporary. Each person is left to act on his own
individual knowledge; no general conspectus guides production; it takes
place without judgment, without foresight; it is deficient at one point and
excessive at another." 244

The economic

crises are thus

due

to the fact that the distribution

of the instruments of production is effected by isolated individuals,
ignorant of the requirements and needs of industry and of the people,

and of the means

that

can

satisfy

them. 245 The solution which the

Saint-Simonians propose was at die time completely new and originew world which they invite us to contemplate

nal. In the

"there will be no longer any proprietors, no isolated capitalists, who by
their habits are strangers to industrial activity, yet who decide the charsocial institution is
acter of the work and the fate of the workers.

A

charged with these functions which to-day are so badly performed; it is
the depository of all the instruments of production; it presides over the

THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS

151

all the material resources; from its point of vantage it has
a comprehensive view of the whole which enables it to perceive at one
and the same time all the parts of the industrial workshop; through its
ramifications it is in touch with all the different places, with all kinds of
industries, and with all the workers; it can thus take account of all the
general and individual wants, bring men and instruments to where the

exploitation of

need for them makes itself felt; in a word, it can direct the production
and put it in harmony with consumption and entrust the tools to the most
deserving industrialists, because it incessantly endeavours to discover their
capacity and is in the best position to develop them ... In this new
the disturbances which follow from the lack of general accord
world
and from the blind distribution of the agents and instruments of production would disappear and with them also the misfortunes, the reverses
and failures of firms against which to-day no peaceful worker is protected.
In a word, industrial activity is organised, everything is connected, everything foreseen; the division of labor is perfected and the combination of
efforts becomes every day more powerful." 248
.

.

.

The

"social institution" which is to perform all these functions is not
vague and undetermined as it was by most later socialists. It is
the banking system, properly reconstructed and centralized and
crowned by a single banque unitaire, directrice, which is to serve as
left

the planning body:

"The

social institution of the future will direct all industries in the

interest of the

whole society and specially of the peaceful workers.

We

call this institution provisionally the general

system of banks, making all
reservations against the too narrow interpretations which one might give
to this term.

"The system

will comprise in the first instance a central bank which
government in the material sphere; this bank will become
the depository of all wealth, of the whole productive fund, of all the instruments of production, in short of everything that to-day makes up the
whole mass of private property." 247

constitutes the

We

need not follow the Exposition further into the

proposed organization.

248

The main

detail of the

points given will suffice to

show

that in their description of the organization of a planned society they
went much further than later socialists until quite recent times, and

also

how

modern

heavily later socialists have drawn on their ideas. Till the
discussion of the problem of calculation in a socialist com-

munity this description of its working has not been further advanced.
There was very little justification for dubbing this very realistic pic-

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

152

ture of a planned society "Utopian." Marx, characteristically, added
to it the one part of classical English economics which was out of
its general analysis of competition, the "objective" or labor
theory of value. The general results of the fusion of Saint-Simonian
and Hegelian ideas, of which Marx is of course the best-known ex-

tune with

240
ponent, will occupy us later.
But in so far as that general socialism which today is common
property is concerned, little had to be added to Saint-Simonian

As a further indication of how profoundly the SaintSimonians have influenced modern thought, it need only be mentioned to what a great extent all European languages have drawn
thought.

from

their vocabulary. "Individualism," 25
252

tivism,"

and the "organization of labor"

"industrialist,"
258

all

occur

251

first in

"posithe Ex-

The concept of the "class struggle" and the contrast between
the "bourgeoisie" and the "proletariat" in the special technical sense of
the terms are Saint-Simonian creations. The word "socialism" itself,

position.

although it does not yet appear in the Exposition (which uses "association" in very much the same sense), appears in its modern mean254 a little later in the Saint-Simonian Globe. 255
ing for the first time

With the appearance of the Exposition, and of a number of arti256
and others in the new Saint-Simonian journals
by Enfantin
Organisateur and Globe which we need not further consider, the development of their ideas which is of interest to us came more or less
suddenly to an end. If we cast a quick glance over the further history
5.

cles

of the School, or rather the Saint-Simonian Church, as it presently
became, it will show why its immediate influence was not greater, or
rather,

why

that influence

was not more

clearly recognized.

The

under Enfantin's influence the doctrine was turned into
a religion; 257 the sentimental and mystic elements gained the upper
hand over the ostensibly scientific and rational, just as they did in
the last phases of Saint-Simon's and later of Comte's life. Already
the second year of the Exposition shows an increasing tendency in
reason

is

that

But in its further career the literary activities are of
importance and it is to the organization of the Church and to
the practical application of its doctrines that we must look for the
picturesque qualities and sensational doings of the new church which
that direction.

less

THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS
have attracted more attention than the
phase of

earlier

153

and more important

its activity. 258

The new

religion consisted at first merely of a vague
belief in human solidarity. But the dogma

pantheism

and a fervent

was much
less important than the cult and the hierarchy. The School became a
Family over which Enfantin and Hazard presided as the two Supreme Fathers new popes with a college of apostles and various
other grades of members below them. Services were organized at
which not only the doctrine was taught, but at which the members
soon began publicly to confess

their sins. Itinerant preachers spread

the doctrine all over the country and founded local centers.
For a time the success was considerable, not only in Paris but

throughout France and even in Belgium. Among their group they
counted then P. Leroux, Adolphe Blanqui, Pecqueur and Cabet.
Le Play was also a member 25d and in Brussels they gained a new
enthusiast for social physics in the astronomer and statistician, A.
Quetelet, who had already been profoundly influenced by the circle
of the Ecole Poly technique. 26

The July revolution of 1830 found
naively assuming that it would place

them
them

altogether unprepared but
into power. It is said that

Bazard and Enfantin even requested Louis Philippe to hand over to
them the Tuileries since they were the only legitimate power on
earth. One effect of the revolution on their doctrines appears to have
been that they felt compelled to make some concessions to the
democratic tendencies of the age. The originally authoritarian socialism thus began its temporary partnership with liberal democracy. The
reasons for this step were explained by the Saint-Simonians with an

amazing frankness, rarely equaled by

later socialists:

"We demand

moment

liberty of religious practice in order that a single rebe
more
can
easily erected on the ruins of the religious past of
ligion
...
the
liberty of the press, because this is the indispensahumanity;

at this

ble condition for the subsequent creation of a legitimate direction of
thought; the liberty of teaching, in order that our doctrine can be

propagated and become one day the only one loved and
followed by all; the destruction of the monopolies as a means of
261
Their
arriving at the definite organisation of the industrial body."

more

easily

real views, however, are better

shown by

their early discovery of,

154

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

and enthusiasm

262

a sympathy
was reciprocated by the "Young
Germans," one of whom, with some justification, remarked that the
Prussians had long been Saint-Simonians. 263 The only other doctrinal
development during this period which we need mention is their increasing interest in railways, canals and banks, to which so many of
them were to give their lifework after the dispersal of the School.
which, as

we

for, the organising

genius of Prussia

shall presently see,

Already Enfantin's early attempt to turn the School into a Religion

had created a certain tension among the leaders and caused some desertions. The main crisis came when he began to develop new theories
about the position of women and the relation between the sexes.
There was practically nothing in the teaching of Saint-Simon himself
to justify this new departure, and the first elements of this doctrine
were probably an importation from Fourierism, with its theory of
the couple, man and woman, constituting the true social individual.
For Enfantin there was only a short step from the principle of the
emancipation of

women

to the doctrine of the "rehabilitation of the

between the "constant" and "inconstant"
which both should be able to have it their
own way. These doctrines and the rumors which got around about
their practical application (for which, it must be admitted, the SaintSimonians gave ample cause in their writings 264 ) created a considerable scandal. A break between Enfantin and Hazard followed, and
the latter left the movement and died nine months later. His chair
was left vacant for the Mere supreme, an honor which George Sand
had declined. With Bazard some of the most eminent members, Carnot, Leroux, Lechevalier and Transon seceded, the last two becoming Fourierists; and a few months later even Rodrigues, the living
link with Saint-Simon, broke with Enfantin.
Faced with a serious setback, since financial difficulties made it
necessary to discontinue the Globe, and as they had begun to attract
flesh"

types

and the

distinction

among both

sexes,

the attention of the police, Enfantin with forty faithful apostles withdrew to a house at Menilmontant, at the outskirts of Paris, to begin
a new life in accordance with the precepts of the doctrine. The forty

men started there a community life without servants, dividing the
menial tasks between them and observing, to silence the ugly rumors,
strict celibacy. But if their life was half modeled on that of a monas-

THE RELIGION OF THE ENGINEERS

155

was more like that of a Nazi Fuhrerschule.
and courses in the doctrine were to prepare them

tery, in other respects it

Athletic exercises
for a

more

active life in the future.

Although they voluntarily confined themselves to
did not cease in their attempts to attract notoriety.

who

their estate, they

The

forty apostles

costumes cultivated their garden and tended
their home became for a while the sensation of the Parisians, who
flocked there in thousands to watch the spectacle. In consequence
in their fantastic

no means reassured the police. Proceedings were inChevalier and Duveyrier for outraging
public morality and ended with their being condemned to imprisonment for one year. The march of the whole group to the law courts
in their peculiar costumes and with their spades and other implements on their shoulders, and the sensational defense of the accused,
was almost the last public appearance of the group. When Enfantin
the "retreat" by
stituted

against Enfantin,

entered the

St.

Pelagier prison to serve his sentence the movement
and the establishment in Menilmontant soon

rapidly to decline

began
broke up. A group of disciples still gave the people much to talk
about by their journey to Constantinople and the East pour chercher
2
la femme libre. * 5 But when Enfantin left the prison, although he
organized another journey to the East, it was for a more sensible
purpose.

He and

a group of Saint-Simonians spent some years in

Egypt, trying to organize the piercing of the Isthmus of Suez. And
although they at first failed to obtain support, it is largely due to their

Suez Canal Company was founded. 266 As we
have occasion to mention again, most of them continued to de-

efforts that later the

shall

vote their lives to similar useful efforts

Enfantin to founding the

Paris-Lyon-Mediterranee railway system and many of his disciples to
organizing railway and canal constructions in other parts of France
and elsewhere. 267

V

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE

L

It is

not easy today to appreciate the immense stir which the
movement caused for a couple of years, not only iq

Saint-Simonian

France, but throughout Europe, or to gauge the extent of the influence which the doctrine has exercised. But there can be little doubt
that this influence was far greater than is commonly realized. If one
were to judge that influence by the frequency with which the SaintSimonians were mentioned in the literature of the time, it would seem
that their celebrity was as short-lived as it was great. We must not
forget, however, that in its later years the school had covered itself
with ridicule by its pseudo-religious harlequinades and its various
escapades and follies, and that in consequence many men who had
absorbed most of its social and philosophical teaching might well
have been ashamed to admit their association with the cranks of
Menilmontant and the men who went to the East in search of the

femme

llbre. It

was only natural

that people should

their Saint-Simonian period as a youthful folly of

wish to boast. But that did not

mean

come

to treat

which they did not

that the ideas they

had then ab-

sorbed did not continue to operate in and through them, and a careful investigation, which has yet to be undertaken, would probably

show how surprisingly wide that influence has extended.
Here we are not primarily interested in tracing the influence of
persons or groups. From our point of view it would be even more
significant if it could be shown that a similar situation has produced
similar ideas elsewhere without any direct influence from the SaintSimonians. Yet any study of similar contemporaneous movements
elsewhere soon reveals a close connection with the French prototypes.
if it is doubtful whether in all these cases we are really entitled

Even
156

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE
to speak of influence,

who happened

those

and whether we should not rather say
to have similar ideas soon found their

157

that all

way

to

Saint-Simonism, it will be worth while to cast a rapid glance over the
variety of channels through which this influence acted, since the exyet so little understood, and particularly because the
of
Saint-Simonism also meant a spreading of Comtian
spreading
tent of

it

is

positivism in

The

its

early form.

point which it is important to realize is that this influence
was by no means confined to people mainly interested in social and
political speculation, but that it was even stronger in literary and
artistic circles, which often became almost unconsciously the medium
of spreading Saint-Simonian conceptions on other matters. In France
first

the Saint-Simonian ideas about the social function of art

made

a deep

impression on some of the

greatest writers of the time, and are held
for
the
responsible
profound change in the literary atmosphere which
then took place. 268 The demand that all art should be tendentious,
that

as

it

it

should serve social criticism and for

is

in all

its

this

purpose represent

life

209
ugliness led to a veritable revolution in letters.

Not only authors who

like

George Sand or Beranger had been

closely

associated with the Saint-Simonians, but some of the greatest writers
of the period such as H. de Balzac, 270 V. Hugo, and Eugene Sue ab-

sorbed and practiced much of the Saint-Simonian teaching. Among
composers Franz Liszt had been a frequent visitor to their meetings
and Berlioz with a Chant d'Inauguration des Chemins de Per applied
Saint-Simonian precepts to music.

The

2.

influence of Saint-Simonism in

in the literary field.

The main

England was also partly
became

expositor of their ideas here

Thomas Carlyle, whose indebtedness to Saint-Simonian
known and who even translated and attempted to
an
with
publish
anonymous introduction Saint-Simon's Nouveau
Christianisme. 211 He is the first of the many instances we shall meet
where Saint-Simonism or Comtian and German influences so readily
for a time

doctrine

is

well

blended. Carlyle's views on the philosophy of history, his exposition
Law of Progress in Sartor Resartus, his division of history into

of the

positive
gin,

and

and negative periods, are
his interpretation of the

mainly of Saint-Simonian oriFrench Revolution is penetrated

all

158

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

with Saint-Simonian thought. The influence which he in turn exercised need not be stressed here, but it is worth pointing out that the

had largely pre272
the
for
them.
way
pared
Better known is the influence which the Saint-Simonians exercised
later English Positivists recognized that his teaching

In his Autobiography 273 he describes them as "the
writers by whom, more than by any others, a new mode of thinking
was brought home" to him and recounts how particularly one of their

on

S. Mill.

J.

publications, which seemed to him far superior to the rest, Comte's
early System of Positive Policy,
existing notions to which it seemed to give a
regarded the methods of physical science as the
proper models for political. But the chief benefit which I derived at this
time from the trains of thought suggested by the Saint-Simonians and by
Comte, was, that I obtained a clearer conception than ever before of the
peculiarities of an era of transition in opinion, and ceased to mistake the
moral and intellectual characteristics of such an era, for the normal
attributes of humanity."

"harmonized well with

my

scientific shape. I already

Mill goes on to explain how, although he lost sight for a time
of Comte, he was kept au courant of the Saint-Simonian's progress
by G. d'Eichthal (who had also introduced Carlyle to Saint-Simon274

how he read nearly everything they wrote and how it was
by their writings that [his] eyes were opened to the very
and temporary value of the old political economy, which assumes private property and inheritance as indefeasible facts and
freedom of production and exchange as the dernier mot of social im275
it appears that he became
provement." From a letter to d'Eichthal
ism),

"partly
limited

so far convinced as to be "inclined to think that [their] social organiunder some modification or other ... is likely to be the final

zation,

and permanent condition of our race," although he differed from
them in believing that it would take many or at least several stages
till mankind would be capable of realizing it. We have here undoubtedly the first roots of J. S. Mill's socialist leanings. But in Mill's
case, too, this was largely a preparation for the still more profound
influence which Comte was later to exercise on him.
3.

In no country outside France, however, did the Saint-Simonian
276
This interest
Germany.

doctrine arouse greater interest than in

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE

159

began to show itself surprisingly early. Already the first Organisateur
seems to have reached a considerable number of readers in that
277
Some years later it seems to have been Comte's pupil
country.
Gustave d'Eichthal who, even before his similar efforts in England,

on a

visit to Berlin in 1824, succeeded in interesting several people
Comte's Systeme de Politique Positive, with the result that a fairly
detailed review, the only one the book ever received in any language,

in

And in Friedrich
appeared in the Leipziger Literatur-Zeitung
then
a
well-known
Buchholz,
political writer, d'Eichthal gained
Comte a warm admirer, who not only in a flattering letter to Comte
279
but who also in 1826 and 1827
expressed complete agreement,
in
his
Neue
Monatsschrijt fur Deutschland four anonypublished
mous articles on Saint-Simon's work, followed by a translation of the
280
concluding part of the Systeme Industriel.

It

was, however, only in the autumn of 1830 that general interest

in the Saint-Simonian

movement awoke

in

Germany; and during the

next two or three years it went like wildfire through the German
literary world. The July Revolution had made Paris once more the
all progressives, and the Saint-Simonians,
then at the height of their reputation, were the outstanding intellectual movement in that Mecca of all liberals.
veritable flood of

center of attraction for

A

books, pamphlets and articles of the Saint-Simonians

281

and

trans-

282

appeared in German and there
was little that could not be learned about them from German sources.
The wave of excitement even reached the old Goethe, who subscribed to the Globe (probably since its liberal days) and who, after
he had warned Carlyle as early as October, 1830, "to keep away
lations of

some of

their writings

from the Societe St. Simonienne," 283 and after several recorded conversations on the subject, in May, 1831, still felt impelled to spend a
284
day reading to get at the bottom of the Saint-Simonian doctrine.
The whole German literary world seems to have been agog for
news about the novel French ideas and to some, as Rahel von Varnhagen describes it, the Saint-Simonian Globe became the indispensable intellectual daily bread. 285 The news about the Saint-Simonian
movements appears to have been the decisive factor which in 1831
drew Heinrich Heine to Paris, 286 and, as he later said, he had not
been twenty-four hours in Paris before he sat in the midst of the

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

160

Saint-Simonians. 287

From

Paris he

and L. Boerne did much

information about the Saint-Simonians in

Germany

to spread

literary circles.

Another important source of information for those who had stayed
behind, particularly the Varnhagens, was the American Albert Brisbane, then not yet a Fourierist, but already spreading socialist ideas
on his travels. 288 How profoundly these ideas were affecting the
poets Laube, Gutzkow, Mundt and Wiebarg has
been well described by Miss E. M. Butler in her book on the SaintSimonian Religion in Germany, where with much justification she
describes the whole Young German school as a Saint-Simonian
movement. 289 In their short but spectacular existence as a group between 1832 and 1835 they persistently, if more crudely than their
French contemporaries, applied the Saint-Simonian principle that art
must be tendentious, and in particular popularized their feminist doctrines and their demands for the "rehabilitation of the flesh." 29

Young German

Much more

4.

much

important for our purpose, but unfortunately
Saint-Simonians to an-

less explored, 291 is the relation of the

other connected

German

group, the

Young

Hegelians.

The curious

which existed between the Hegelian and the Saint-Simonian
ideas and which was strongly felt by the contemporaries will occupy
us later. Here we are concerned only with the actual extent to which
the younger Hegelian philosophers were directly affected by SaintSimonian ideas, and how much therefore the decisive change which
led to the separation of the Young Hegelians from the orthodox followers of the philosopher may have been partly due to that influence.
affinity

Our

actual knowledge

on

this point is small, yet, as there existed

close personal contacts between the Young Germans and the members of what later became the Young Hegelian group, and as some

of the former as well as some of the authors of the German works
on Saint-Simon were Hegelians, 292 there can be little doubt that in
the group as a whole the interest in Saint-Simonism cannot have
been much smaller than among the Young Germans.
The period of German thought which is still so little explored and
yet so crucial for the understanding of the later developments is the
eighteen-thirties, during which it seems the seeds were sown which

bore

fruit

293
only in the next decade.

We

meet here with the

difficulty

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE

161

had discredited themselves, people bereluctant to acknowledge any indebtedness, especially as
the Prussian censorship was likely to object to any reference to that

that after the Saint-Simonians

came most

dangerous group. As early as 1834, G. Kuehne, a Hegelian philosopher closely connected with the Young Germans, said of Saint-

Simonism, "the French counterpart of Hegelianism," that "it will
scarcely any longer be permissible to mention the name, yet the basic
feature of this view of life, which in this particular form has become
a caricature, will prove to have been completely embedded in social
relations." 294 And when we remember that the men who were to
play the decisive role in the revolt against orthodox Hegelianism and
in the birth of German socialism, A. Ruge, L. Feuerbach, D. F.
Strauss, Moses Hess and K. Rodbertus, were all in their twenties
when the rage for Saint-Simonism swept through Germany, 295 it
seems almost certain that they all imbibed Saint-Simonian doctrine at
the time. Only of one of them, although the one from whom socialist
doctrines are known to have spread more than from anybody else in
the Germany of the time, Moses Hess, is it definitely known that he
visited Paris in the early 'thirties, 296

and the traces of Saint-Simonian
and Fourierist doctrines can easily be seen in his first book of
1837 297 j n th e case O f some O f the others, as particularly in that of
the most influential of the Young Hegelians, Ludwig Feuerbach, in
whom Positivism and Hegelianism were so completely combined and
who exercised great influence on Marx and Engels, we have no direct evidence of his having

would be even more
positivist

known

the Saint-Simonian writings. It

significant, if this Hegelian,

who

in providing a

Weltanschauung for the next generations of German scien-

tists was to play a role similar to that of Comte in France, had arrived at his view independently of the contemporary movements in
that country. But it seems practically certain that he must have come

to

know them

in the formative period of his thought. It is hard to
young university lecturer in philosophy, who, in the

believe that the

summer of 1832, when Germany was reverberating with discussions
of Saint-Simonism, spent months in Frankfurt reading to prepare
himself for an intended visit to Paris, 298 should, almost alone among
men of his kind, have escaped their influence. It seems much more
likely that, as in the case of others,

it

was

precisely the

fame of

this

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

162

him to Paris. And although the intended visit
did not take place, Feuerbach probably absorbed much of SaintSimonian thought at that time and thus prepared himself to replace
the Saint-Simonian influence among his younger contemporaries. If
school which attracted

one reads

his

work with

Comte

of

An
many

mind, it becomes difficult
between his work and that

this probability in

to believe that the obvious resemblances

are accidental. 299

important role in spreading French socialist thought in Gerduring

this

period was also played by various

members

of the

large colony of German journeymen in Paris, whose organizations
became so important for the growth of the socialist movement and

among whom

He

300
Weitling was the outstanding figure.
and numerous other travelers must have provided a continuous

for a time

W.

stream of information about the development of French doctrine,
even before, in the beginning of the 'forties, Lorenz von Stein and
Karl Grim went to Paris for a systematic study of French socialism.
With the appearance of the two books 301 which were the results of
these

visits,

particularly with

Lorenz von

Stein's

most detailed and

sympathetic account in his widely read Socialism and Communism
in Present-Day France (1842), the whole of Saint-Simonian doctrine became common property in Germany. That Stein
incidentally
another Hegelian who was most ready to absorb and spread SaintSimonian ideas was, with Feuerbach, one of the strongest influences
that were brought to bear on Karl Marx's early development is well

known. 302 Yet the

it was only through Stein and Grim
and
(and later, perhaps, Thierry
Mignet) that Marx made his acwith
ideas
and that he studied them at
Saint-Simonian
quaintance
first hand only later in Paris, is probably mistaken. It seemed certain
that he was directly affected by the early wave of Saint-Simonian enthusiasm when he was a boy of thirteen or fourteen. He himself told

his friend, the

belief that

Russian historian M. Kowalewski,

how

his paternal

Baron Ludwig von Westphalen, had
been infected by the general enthusiasm and had talked to the boy
about the new ideas. 303 The fact, often noted by German scholars, 804

friend and later father-in-law,

that

many

parts of Marx's doctrine, particularly the theory of the
and certain aspects of his interpretation of history, bear

class struggle

a much

closer resemblance to those of Saint-Simon than to those of

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE

163

Hegel, becomes even more interesting when we realize that the influence of Saint-Simon on Marx seems to have preceded that of Hegel.
Friedrich Engels, in whose separate writings Saint-Simonian ele-

ments are perhaps even more conspicuous than in those of Marx,
was at one time closely associated with some of the members of the
Young German movement, particularly Gutzkow, and later received
his first introduction to socialist theory from M. Hess. 303 The other
leaders

of

German

socialist

thought are similarly indebted.

How

closely most of Rodbertus' doctrines resemble those of the SaintSimonians has often been noticed and, in view of the whole situation,
there can be little doubt about the direct derivation. 806 Among the

members

leading

of the active socialist

movement

W. Liebknecht that he steeped
Simonian doctrine when still very young, 307 while
know

at least of

most of
5.

it

We

Simonism
fluence

is

from

his masters

in

Germany, we

himself in SaintLassalle received

Lorenz von Stein and Louis Blanc. 308

'

809

have not yet said anything about the relations of SaintFrench socialist schools. But this part of their inon the whole so well known that we can be brief. The only
to later

socialists who was independent of SaintSimon was of course his contemporary Charles Fourier 31
who,
with Robert Owen and Saint-Simon, is usually regarded as one of the
three founders of socialism. But although the Saint-Simonians borrowed from him some elements of their doctrines particularly with

one of the early French

neither he nor, for that
respect to the relations between the sexes
matter, Robert Owen, contributed much to that aspect of socialism
which is relevant here: the deliberate organisation and direction of

His contribution there is more of a negative chareconomy, he could see nothing but waste in the
institutions
and surpassed even the Saint-Simonians in his
competitive
belief in the unbounded possibilities of technological progress. There
was indeed much of the engineer mentality in him and, like Saint-

economic
acter.

A

activity.

fanatic for

Simon, he recruited his pupils largely among the polytechnicians. He
probably the earliest representative of the myth of "scarcity in the
midst of plenty," which to the engineering mind seemed as obvious
120 years ago as it does now.
is

Victor Considerant, the leader of the Fourierist school which gave

164

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

more coherence than did their master, was a polyand most of the influential members, like Transon and
311
Of the rival socialist sects
Lechevalier, were old Saint-Simonians.
who had develall
were
former
Saint-Simonians
the
leaders
nearly
that
doctrine:
of
Buchez and
Leroux,
Cabet,
oped particular aspects
is pure
du
Louis
whose
Travail
like
Blanc,
Organisation
Pecqueur, or,
most
borrowed
from
it.
Even
the
had
Saint-Simonism,
extensively
he
much
of
however
the
later
French
socialists, Proudhon,
original
socialto
was
in
his
have
contributed
may
properly
political doctrine,
312
It can be said that by about
ist doctrines largely Saint-Simonian.
1840 Saint-Simonian ideas had ceased to be the property of a particular school and had come to form the basis of all the socialist
movements. And the socialism of 1848 apart from the strong
democratic and anarchistic elements which by then had been carried
was in doctrine and personnel still
into it as new and alien elements

their doctrines

technician,

largely Saint-Simonian.
6.
Although there is already some danger that we may appear
unduly to exaggerate the importance of that little group of men, we
have by no means yet surveyed the full extent of their influence. To

be inspirers of practically all socialist movements 313 during the past
hundred years would be enough to secure them an important place
in history.

The

influence which Saint-Simon exercised

on the study of

problems through Comte and Thierry, and the Saint-Simonians
through Quetelet and Le Play is hardly less important and will occupy us again. A full account of the spreading of their ideas through
Europe would have to give considerable attention to the profound
influence they exercised on G. Mazzini, 314 the whole Young Italian
social

Movement, Silvio Pellico, Gioberti, Garibaldi, and others 315 in Italy,
and to trace their effects on such divers figures as A. Strindberg in
316
A. Herzen in Russia, 317 and others in Spain and South
Sweden,
America. 318 Nor can we stop here to consider the frequent occurrence of similar types who sometime rallied to the Saint-Simonian
flag as did the Belgian industrialist, sociologist and benefactor Ernest
319

who in post-war France pubSuch conscious or unconscious re-births
we meet throughout the last hundred years. 321

Solvay,
lished a

or the Neo-Saint-Simoniens

new Producteur

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE

165

There is, however, one direct effect of Saint-Simonian teaching
which deserves more consideration: the founders of modern socialism also did much to give Continental capitalism its peculiar form;

"monopoly capitalism," or "finance capitalism," growing up through
the intimate connection between banking and industry (the banks
organizing industrial concerns as the largest shareholders of the component firms), the rapid development of joint-stock enterprises and
the large railway combines are largely Saint-Simonian creations.
The history of this is mainly one of the Credit Mobilier type of

bank, the kind of combined deposit and investment institution which
was first created by the brothers Pereire in France and then imitated under their personal influence or by other Saint-Simonians alall over the European Continent. One might almost say that

most

had

about the reforms they
or
after they had grown older
movement,
and more worldly, they undertook to transform the capitalist system
from within and thus to apply as much of their doctrines as they
after the Saint-Simonians

failed to bring

desired through a political

could by individual effort. And it cannot be denied that they succeeded in changing the economic structure of the Continental countries into

something quite different from the English type of competiEven if the Credit Mobilier of the Pereires ultimately

tive capitalism.

failed,

it

and

its

industrial concerns

became the model on which

the

banking and capital structure in most of the industrial countries of
Europe were developed, partly by other Saint-Simonians. For the
Pereires the aim of their Credit Mobilier was most definitely to create
a center of administration and control which was to direct according
to a coherent program the railway systems, the town planning activities and the various public utilities and other industries which by a
systematic policy of mergers they attempted to consolidate into a
few large undertakings. 322 In Germany G. Mevissen and A. Oppenheim, who had early come under Saint-Simonian influence, went
similar ways with the foundation of the Darmstaedter Bank and other
323 In Holland other Saint-Simonians worked in the
banking ventures.
same direction, 324 and in Austria, 325 Italy, Switzerland and Spain 32 *
the Pereires or their subsidiaries or connections created similar institutions.

What

is

known

as the

connection with industry and

"German" type

of

bank with

its

close

the whole system of Effektenkapitalis-

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

166

mus

as

it

has been called

is

essentially the realization of Saint-Simon-

ian plans. 327 This development was closely connected with the other
favorite activity of the Saint-Simonians in later years, railway con328
and their interest in public works of all kinds, 329 which,
struction,

as years went by,

became more and more

their chief interest.

As En-

organized the Paris-Lyon-Mediterranee railway system, the
Pereires built railways in Austria, Switzerland, Spain and Russia and
fantin

P. Talabot in Italy, employing as engineers on the spot other SaintSimonians to carry out their directions. Enfantin, looking back at the

works of the Saint-Simonians in late life, was well entitled to say
that they had "covered the earth with a net-work of railways, gold,
38
silver, and electricity."
with their far-flung plans for industrial organization they did not
succeed in creating large combines, as was later done with the assistIf

ance of the Governments in the process of cartelization, this was
due to the policy of Free Trade on which France had em-

largely

barked and of which some of the old Saint-Simonians, particularly
M. Chevalier, but also the Pereires, were still among the chief ad-

But already others from the same circle, notably Pecqueur, 331
were agitating in the same direction as their friend Friedrich List in
Germany. Yet they could not succeed till another branch from the
same stem, positivism and "historicism," had succeeded in effectively
vocates.

discrediting "orthodox" political economy. The arguments, however,
which were later to justify a policy of supporting the growth of cartels

were already created by the Saint-Simonians.

However

far their practical influence extended,

it

was

greatest in

France during the second Empire. During this period they had not
only the support of the Press because some of the leading journalists

were old Saint-Simonians; 332 but the most important fact was that
Napoleon III himself was so profoundly influenced by Saint-Simonian

him "Saint-Simon on horseback." 333
terms with some of its members and even

ideas that Saint-Beuve could call

He remained on friendly
committed himself to part of their ideas in his programmatic Idtes
334
It is thus not surprising
Napoleoniennes and some other pamphlets.
that the years of the second Empire became the great period of the
Saint-Simonian realisations. So closely indeed did they become asso-

SAINT-SIMONIAN INFLUENCE
elated with the regime that its end meant
of their direct influence in France. 335

When

to this influence of the

more or

less also the

French Empire we add the

167

end

facts that

Bismarck's social policy and ideas were largely derived from Lassalle
and thus via Louis Blanc, Lorenz von Stein and Rodbertus from
336

and that the theory of the soziale Konigtum and state
which guided the execution of that policy, can be traced,
through L. von Stein and Rodbertus and others, to the same
337
we begin to get the measure of this influence in the ninesource,
teenth century. Even if this influence was tempered by others which
in any case would have worked in the same direction, the statement
of the German K. Grim, which may conclude this survey, appears
certainly in no way to exaggerate their importance. "Saint-Simonism," he wrote in 1845, "is like a seed-pod that has been opened and
whose husk has been lost, while the individual seeds have found soil
everywhere and have come up, one after the other." And in his enumeration of all the different movements which have been thus ferS38
tilized, we find for the first time the term "scientific socialism,"
applied to the work of Saint-Simon who "had throughout his life been
Saint-Simon,
socialism,

searching for the

new

science."

VI

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

339 there
Systeme de politique positive
began to appear that work of Comte to which his fame is mainly due.
The Cours de philosophie positive, the literary version of the series
of lectures which he had first started in 1826, and then, after recovery from his mental illness, delivered in 1829, extended to six
volumes which appeared between 1830 and 1842. 340 In devoting the
best years of his manhood to this theoretical task, Comte remained
faithful to the conviction which had led to his break with SaintSimon: that the political reorganization of society could be achieved
only after the spiritual foundation had been laid by a reorganization
of all knowledge. 341 But he never lost sight of the political task. The

1.

Eight years after the

first

main philosophical work was duly followed by the definite Systeme
de politique positive (4 vols., 1851-1854) which, in spite of all its
bizarre excrescences,

youth.

And

if

is

a consistent execution of the plans of his
1857 had not prevented it, this would

his death in

have been followed by the third part of the original plan, a similarly
elaborate treatise on technology or "the action of man upon nature."

No attempt can be made here to give an adequate summary of the
whole of Comte's philosophy or of its evolution. We are concerned
only with the birth of the new discipline, of which Saint-Simon and
the younger Comte had only dreamt but which the latter's mature
works brought into existence. Yet, as the whole of Comte's work is
directed towards this end, this is not a sufficient restriction of our
task. We shall have to confine ourselves to a consideration of those
aspects of his immense work which, either because of their influence
on other leading thinkers of the period, or because they are particularly representative of the intellectual tendencies of the age, are of

168

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

169

methods appropriate
which is extensively

special significance. They concern mainly the
to the study of social phenomena, a subject

treated in the Cours. But it should perhaps be pointed out that it is
because the subjects which mainly concern us are treated in that
work that we shall confine ourselves to its contents, and that we can-

not accept the belief, at one time widely held, that there is a fundamental break between it and Comte's later work, brought about by
the increasingly pathological state of his mind. 342
few further facts of Comte's life may be recalled here which will

A

help to understand his views and the extent and limits of his influence. The most important feature of his career is, perhaps, that
trained as a mathematician he remained one by profession. Through
the greater part of his life he derived his income from coaching and

examining in mathematics for the Ecole polytechnique but the professorship at the institution which he coveted remained denied to
him. The repeated disappointments and the quarrels caused by his

end lost him even the modest positions
which he held, explain to some extent his increasing isolation, his
outspoken -contempt for most of his scientific contemporaries, and
recriminations, which in the

the almost complete neglect of his work in his own country during
Although in the end he found a few enthusiastic dis-

his life-time.

it is on the whole not difficult to see why to most people he
seems to have appeared a singularly unattractive figure, whose whole
intellectual style has often repelled those who have most in common
with him. 343 The man who prided himself that in a few years of his
youth he had absorbed all the knowledge from which he could construct a grandiose systematization of all human science and who,

ciples,

through a great part of his
sisting in not reading any

life,

new

practiced a "cerebral hygiene" conpublications, was not likely to be

readily accepted as that preceptor mundi et universae scientiae he
claimed to be. The excessive length and prolixity and the clumsy
style of his mature works were a further bar to its popularity. Yet if
this restricted the

with his work,

some

of the

it

most

number of people who became directly acquainted
was made up for by the profound effect it had on
influential thinkers of the age.

direct, his influence is

tury, certainly

among the most potent

where the study of

social

Although largely

in-

in the nineteenth cen-

phenomena

is

concerned.

170

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

2.
The whole of Comte's philosophy hinges, of course, upon the
celebrated law of the three stages which we have already met in his
early essays. His very task is determined for him by that law: all the

simpler sciences like physics, chemistry, and biology having reached
the positive stage, it was reserved for Comte to do the same for the

crowning science of the human race and thus to complete the main
development of the human mind. The stress which Comte himself
and still more his interpreters have put on the three separate stages
is, however, rather misleading. The great contrast is between, on the

one hand, the theological and the metaphysical stage (the latter being
a mere "modification" 344 of the first), and, on the other, the positive
stage. What he is concerned with is the continuous and gradual
emancipation from the anthropomorphic interpretation of all phenomena 345 which each science completely achieves only as it reaches
the positive stage. The metaphysical stage is no more than the phase
of dissolution of the theological stage, the critical phase in which
man has already abandoned the cruder personalistic view which seeks
spirits and deities in all phenomena, but has merely replaced them
with abstract entities or essences which have as little place in the
truly positivist view of science. In the positive phase every attempt
to explain

phenomena by causes or a statement

of the

"mode

of

346
it aims at directly connecting the obproduction" is abandoned;
served phenomena by rules about the coexistence or sequence or, to

use a modern phrase not yet used by Comte, at merely "describing"
their interrelations by general and invariable laws. In other words,

man had acquired in interpreting
own kind had long held up the study of external
nature, and the latter had only made real progress in proportion as it
got rid of this human habit, the way to progress in the study of man
must be the same: we must cease to consider man anthropomorphically and must treat him as if we knew about him as little as we
know about external nature. Although Comte does not say so in so
many words, he comes very near doing so, and therefore one cannot
help wondering how he could have failed to see the paradoxical nasince the habits of thought which

the actions of his

ture of this conclusion. 847

But

that in the positive treatment of social phenomena man must
way in which we approach the

not be treated differently from the

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

phenomena

171

is only a negative characteristic of
"natural science" 348 of society will as-

of inanimate nature

the character which the

new

We

have yet to see what the positive characteristics of the
method
are. This is a far more difficult task, as Comte's
"positive"
statements on most of the epistemological problems involved are distressingly na'ive and unsatisfactory. The basis of Comte's views is
sume.

the apparently simple contention that "the fundamental character of
all positive philosophy is to regard all phenomena as subject to in-

whose precise discovery and reduction to the
349
All science
possible is the aim of all our effort."

variable natural laws,
smallest

number

deals with observed facts, 350 and, as he states in a sentence which he

quotes with pride from his essay of 1825, "any proposition which
does not admit of being reduced to a simple enunciation of fact,
351
But the
special or general, can have no real or intelligible sense."
question to which

Comte's work

is

is

it

exceedingly

are all subject to invariable

difficult

to find

an answer in

meant by the "phenomena" which
laws, or what he regards as "facts." The

what precisely

is

statement that

all phenomena are subject to invariable natural laws
makes
sense
clearly
only if we are given some guidance on what individual events are to be regarded as the same phenomena. It evidently cannot mean that everything which appears the same to our
senses must behave in the same manner. The task of science is precisely to reclassify the sense impressions on the basis of their coexistence with or succession to others so as to make it possible to

establish regularities for the behavior of the

of reference. But this
struction of such

new

is

newly constructed units
what
Comte
exactly
objects to. The con-

entities as the "ether"

is

definitely a

metaphysi-

procedure and any attempt to explain the "mode of production"
of the phenomena as distinct from the study of the laws which connect the directly observed facts is to be proscribed. The emphasis
lies on the establishment of direct relationship among the immedical

But what these facts (which may be "particular" or
seems
are
to constitute no problem for Comte, who ap"general"!)
the
with
an entirely naive and uncritical realism.
proaches
question
ately given facts.

As

in the

whole of 19th century positivism, 352

ceedingly obscure.

this

concept

is left

ex-

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

172

The only

3.

used by Comte

indication of

we

what

obtain from

is

meant by the term "fact"

as

regular conjunction with the adwith
his
discussion of what he means by
"observed,"
jective
together
observation. This is of great importance for its meaning in the field
its

with which we are concerned, the study of human and social phenomena. "True observation," we are told, "must necessarily be external to the observer" and the "famous internal observation is no
more than a vain parody of it," which presupposes the "ridiculously
contradictory situation of our intelligence contemplating itself during
the habitual performance of its own activity." 353 Comte accordingly
consistently denies the possibility of all psychology, that "last transformation of theology," 354 or at least of all introspective knowledge

of the human mind. There are only two ways in which
nomena of the individual mind can properly become the

the phe-

object of

positive study: either through the study of the organs which produce
355
them, that is through "phrenological psychology";
or, since "affective

and

intellectual functions"

have the peculiar characteristic of

"not being subject to direct observation during their performance,"
through the study of "their more or less immediate and more or less
durable results"

356

which would seem

to

mean what

is

now

called

the behaviorist approach. To these only two legitimate ways of studying the phenomena of the individual mind is later added, as the result of the creation of sociology, the study of the "collective

the only form of psychology proper which

is

mind,"
admitted into the posi-

tive system.

As

regards the

first

we need

of these aspects

here say no more

remarkable that even Comte should have fallen so
under
the influence of the founder of "phrenology," the
completely
"illustrious Gall" whose "immortal works are irrevocably impressed
than that

upon

the

it

is

human mind,"

857

as to believe that his attempt at localiz-

ing particular mental "faculties" in particular parts of the brain
should provide an adequate substitute for all other forms of psy-

chology.
The "behaviorist" approach in
tion,

because in

this primitive

Comte

form

it

deserves rather

more

atten-

shows particularly clearly

its

weakness. Only a few pages after Comte has confined the study of
the individual mind to the observation of its "more or less immediate

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

and more or

173

durable results" this becomes the direct observation

less

of "the series of intellectual and moral acts, which belongs more to
natural history proper" and which he seems to regard as in some

sense objectively given and known without any use of introspection
or any other means different from "external observation." Thus Comte
not only tacitly admits intellectual phenomena among his "facts"

which are to be treated like any objectively observed facts of nature;
he even admits, to all intents and purposes, that our knowledge of
man, which we possess only because we are men ourselves and think
like other men, is an indispensable condition of our interpretation of
social phenomena. It can only mean this when he emphasizes that
wherever we have to deal with "animal" life (as distinguished from
merely vegetative life, i.e., those phenomena which appear only in
the higher part of the zoological scale), 358 investigation cannot succeed unless we begin with "the consideration of man, the sole being
where this order of phenomena can ever be directly intelligible." 359
4.
Comte's theory of the three stages is closely connected with
the second 'main characteristic of his system, his classification, or the
theory of the "positive hierarchy," of the sciences. In the beginning

of the Cours he

cation of

all

still

plays with the Saint-Simonian idea of the unifi-

sciences by reducing

all

phenomena

to

one

single law,

the law of gravitation. 360 But gradually he abandons this belief and
in the end it becomes even the subject of violent denunciation as an
861

Instead, the "fundamental" or theoretical sci(as distinguished from their concrete applications) are arranged in a single linear order of decreasing generality and increas-

"absurd Utopia."
ences

ing complexity, beginning with mathematics (including theoretical
mechanics) and leading through astronomy, physics, chemistry, and
biology (which includes all study of man as an individual) to the
new and final science of social physics or sociology. As each of these
fundamental sciences is "based" on those preceding it in the hierit makes use of all the
some new elements peculiar to

archical order, in the sense that

results of the

preceding sciences plus

itself, it is

an

"indispensable complement of the law of the three stages" that the
different sciences can reach the positive stage only successively in this
"invariable

and necessary order." But

as the last of these sciences has

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

174

object the growth of the human mind and therefore particuthe
larly
development .of science itself, it becomes, once established,
the universal science which will progressively tend to absorb all
for

its

in

knowledge

its

system, although this ideal

may

never be fully

realized.

Here we are

interested only in the meaning of the assertion that
on the results of all other sciences and therefore

sociology "rests"

could only be created after all the other sciences had reached the
positive stage. This has nothing to do with the undeniable contention
that the biological study of man as one of the most complicated organisms will have to make use of the results of all the other natural

Comte's sociology, as we

shall see presently, does not deal
as a physical unit but with the evolution of the human mind
as a manifestation of the "collective organism" which mankind as a

sciences.

with

man

whole constitutes. It is the study of the organization of society and
the laws of the evolution of the human mind which are supposed to
require the use of the results of

would be

Comte

all

the other sciences.

Now

this

contended that the aim of sociology
(and that part of biology which in his system replaces individual
psychology) was to explain mental phenomena in physical terms,
that is, if he wanted seriously to carry out his early dreams of unifijustified if

really

on the basis of some single universal law. 362
But this he has explicitly abandoned. His schematism leads him indeed to assert that none of the phenomena belonging to any of the
sciences higher up in his hierarchy can ever fully be reduced to, or
cation of

all

sciences

explained in terms

of, the

to explain sociological

preceding sciences.

phenomena

It is just as

purely in biological

impossible
terms as, in

remain forever impossible to reduce chemical phealtogether to physical. While there will always be sociological laws which cannot be reduced to mechanical or biological laws,
this break between sociology and biology is no different from the presumed difference between chemistry and physics.
his opinion,

it

will

nomena

When, however, Comte

tries to

prove his contention that sociology

depends on a sufficient development of the other sciences, he fails
completely, and the examples he gives as illustrations are almost
childish. That in order to understand any social phenomena we have
to know the explanation of the change of day and night and of the

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

175

changes of the seasons "by the circumstances of the earth's daily rotation and annual movements," or that "the very conception of the
stability in human association could not be positively established till
the discovery of gravitation," 363 is simply not true. The results of the
natural sciences may be essential data for sociology to the extent to
affect the actions of the men who use them. But
whatever the state of natural knowledge is, and there is
no reason why the sociologist need know more of natural science
than those whose actions he tries to explain, and therefore no reason

which they actually
that

is

true,

the development of the study of society should have to wait on
the natural sciences having reached a certain stage of development.
Comte claims that with the application of the positive method to

why

the unity of method of all sciences is established.
characteristic of the positive method, "to
as
abandon,
necessarily vain, all search for causes, be it primary or
social

phenomena

But beyond the general
final,

and

to confine itself to the study of the invariable relations

which constitute the effective laws of all observable events," 364 it is
difficult to say in what precisely this positive method consists. It certainly is not, as one might expect, the universal application of mathematical methods. Although mathematics is to Comte the source of
the positive method, the field where it appeared first and in its purest
365
he does not believe that it can be usefully applied in the
form,
more complicated subjects, even chemistry, 366 and he is scornful
about the attempts to apply

statistics to

biology

367

or the calculus of

368

Even observation, the one comprobability to social phenomena.
mon element of all sciences, does not appear in the same form in all
of them.

As

the sciences

become more complicated, new methods

of

become

available while others appropriate to the less
complicated phenomena cease to be useful. Thus, while in astronomy
the mathematical method and pure observation rule, in physics and

observation

chemistry the experiment comes in as a new help. And as we proceed further, biology brings the comparative method and sociology,
finally, the "historical method," while mathematics and the experi-

ment become
There
must be

in turn inapplicable. 869

one more aspect of the hierarchy of the sciences which
briefly mentioned, as it is relevant to points which we shall
is

presently have to consider.

As we ascend

the hierarchical scale of the

176

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

sciences,

and the phenomena with which they deal become more combecome more subject to modification by human acsame time less "perfect" and therefore more in need

plex, they also
tion and at the

of

improvement by human

control.

Comte has nothing but contempt

for people who admire the "wisdom of nature," and he is quite certain that a few competent engineers in creating an organism for a
370 And
the same applies
particular task would do infinitely better.

necessarily to the most complicated and therefore most imperfect of
all natural phenomena, human society. The paradox that the instru-

ment of the human mind, which according to this theory should be
the most imperfect of all phenomena, should yet at the same time
have the unique power to control and improve itself, does not trouble
Comte in the least.
5.

There

is

one respect

stresses a difference in the

which Comte not only admits but even
method, not only of sociology, but of all

in

organic sciences from that of inorganic sciences. Yet, although this
break occurs between chemistry and biology, the importance of this
"inversion" of procedure, as Comte calls it himself, is of even
greater importance with respect to sociology
passage in which he himself explains

full the

to the study of social

phenomena. "There

and we
it

shall quote in
with direct reference

exists necessarily,"

he ex-

"a fundamental difference between the whole of inorganic
philosophy and the whole of organic philosophy. In the first, where

plains,

solidarity

between the phenomena, as we have shown,

nounced, and can only

little

is little

affect the study of the subject,

pro-

we have

to explore a system where the elements are better known than the
whole, and are usually even alone directly observable. But in the sec-

man and society constitute the principal
the
object,
opposite procedure becomes most often the only rational
one, as another consequence of the same logical principle, because
the whole of the object is here Certainly much better known and more
ond, on the contrary, where

371

immediately accessible."
This astounding assertion that where

phenomena

we have to deal with social
known than the parts is put forward
axiom without much explanation. It is of crucial
understanding of the new science of sociology as

the whole

as an indisputable
importance for the

is

better

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS
created by

cance
is

Comte and accepted by

177

his direct successors. Its signifi-

further enhanced by the fact that this collectivist approach
characteristic of most of the students who approach such pheis

called a "scientistic" point of view. 872
be admitted that it is not easy to see why this should be

nomena from what we have
But it must
so, and Comte

One

gives us

little

help in this respect.

possible justification of this view which would occur first to
at best a very minor role in Comte's

modern mind, played

the

thought: the idea that mass phenomena may show statistical reguwhile the composing elements seem to follow no recognizable
law. 373 This idea, made familiar by Comte's contemporary Quetelarities

374

is certainly not the foundation of Comte's own argument. It is
indeed more than doubtful whether Comte ever took notice of Quetelet's work beyond showing indignation about the latter's using, in the

let,

work dealing with "mere statistics," 375 the term "social
which
Comte regarded as his intellectual property. But
physics,"
though Quetelet seems thus to have been indirectly responsible
subtitle of a

376 for what
Comte
"sociology,"
the fourth volume of the Cours still describes as "so-

for the substitution of the
till

well

on 'in

new word

cial physics," 377 his

main idea, which should have fitted so well into
Comte's general approach and was to play so important a role in
later scientistic sociology, found no place in Comte's system.
We shall probably have to see the explanation in Comte's general
attitude of treating whatever phenomena a science had to deal with
as immediately given "things" and in his desire to establish a similarity between biology, the science immediately beneath sociology in
the positive hierarchy, and the science of the "collective organism."

And

since in biology

were better known

it

was unquestionably

to us than their parts, the

true that the organisms
to be asserted

same had

of sociology.

The exposition of Comte's sociology, which was to constitute
6.
the fourth volume of the Cours, extended in fact to three volumes
each considerably longer than any of the first three dealing with all
the other sciences. The fourth volume, published in 1839, contains
mainly the general considerations on the new science and its static
part. The two remaining ones contain a very full and detailed ex-

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

178

position of sociological dynamics, that general theory of the history
of the human mind, which was the main aim of Comte's labors.

The
Comte

division of the subject into statics and dynamics, 378 which
believes to be appropriate to all sciences, he takes over, not

from mechanics, but from biology to which it had been applied by the physiologist De Blainville, whose work had influenced
Comte to an extent equaled only by Lagrange, Fourier, and Gall. 879
The distinction, which according to De Blainville in biology corresponds to that between anatomy and physiology, or organization and
life, is made to correspond in sociology with the two great watchwords of positivism, order and progress. Static sociology deals with
directly

the laws of co-existence of social

ology

is

phenomena, while dynamic sociconcerned with the laws of succession in the necessary evo-

lution of society.

When

comes

scheme it proves, however,
on the static part of his
subject. His disquisitions about the necessary consensus between all
the parts of any social system, the idee mere of solidarity as he often
calls it, which in social phenomena is even more marked than in
biological, remain pretty empty generalizations, as Comte has no way
(or intention) of establishing why particular institutions, or which
kinds of institutions, should necessarily go together, or others be incompatible. The comments on the relations between the individual,
the family, and society, in the single chapter devoted to social statics,
rise little above the commonplace. 380 In the discussion of the division
of labor, although a distant echo of Adam Smith, 381 there is no trace
of a comprehension of the factors which regulate it; and how little
he understands them becomes evident when he expressly denies that
that

it

Comte has

to the execution of this

extraordinarily

little

to say

a division of intellectual labor similar to that applying to material
labor

is

possible.

882

The whole of his statics is, however, no more than a brief sketch
and of minor importance compared with the dynamic part of sociology, the fulfillment of his main ambition. It is the attempt to prove
the basic contention, which Comte, as a young man of twenty-six,
had expressed in a letter to a friend when he promised to show that
"there were laws governing the development of the human race as
definite as those determining the fall of a stone." 883 History was to

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS
be made a science, and the essence of
384
capable of prediction.

all

science

is

that

it

179

should be

The dynamic

part of sociology was therefore to become a philosophy of history, as it is commonly but somewhat misleadingly called, or a theory of history as it would be more
correctly described. The idea which was to inspire so
thought of the second half of the nineteenth century,

"abstract history,"
885

The new

*

names

'history without the

was

of

men

much
was

of the

to write

or even peo-

scheme, an
which the major changes of human civilization must
necessarily follow each other.
The basis of this scheme is of course the law of the three stages
and the main content of dynamic sociology is a detailed elaboration
ple."
abstract order in

science

to provide a theoretical

It is thus a curious feature of the Comtian system that
same law which is supposed to prove the necessity of the new
science is at the same time its main and almost sole result. We need

of the law.
this

not trouble here with its elaboration in detail, beyond saying that in
Comte's hands human history becomes largely identified with the
386
What is relevant to us are only the
growth of the natural sciences.
general implications of the idea of a natural science which deals with
the laws of intellectual development of the human race, and the
practical conclusions drawn from it with regard to the future organization of society. The idea of recognizable laws, not only of the
growth of individual minds, but of the development of the knowledge

of the

human

race as a whole, presupposes that the

could, so to speak, look down
able not merely to understand
serve

it,

as

on
its

were, from the outside.

it

human mind

from a higher plane and be
operation from the inside, but obitself

The curious

thing about this

proposition, particularly in its Comtian form, is that although it explicitly recognizes that the interactions of individual minds may pro-

duce something

in a sense superior to

what an individual mind can

yet claims for the same individual mind not only the
to
grasp this development as a whole and to recognize the
power
which it works and even the course it must follow, but
on
principle

ever achieve,

also the
its

it

power

to control

and

direct

it

and thereby

to

improve uppn

uncontrolled working.

What

this belief really

process of

amounts

to

is

mind can be comprehended

that the products of the
as a

whole by a simpler

180

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

process than the laborious one of understanding them, and that the
individual mind, looking at these results from the outside, can then

wholes by laws applying to them as entities,
finally, by extrapolating the observed development, achieve a
kind of shortcut to the future development. This empirical theory of
directly connect these

and

the development of the collective

mind

is

at the

same time

the

most

naive and the most influential result of the application of the procedure of the natural sciences to social phenomena, and of course

based on the illusion that the phenomena of the mind are in the
same sense given as objective things, and subject to external observation and control as physical phenomena. It follows from this approach that our knowledge is to be regarded as "relative" and conditioned by assignable factors
not merely from the point of view
of some hypothetical more highly organized mind, but from our own
point of view. It is from this point of view that the belief springs that
we ourselves can recognize the "mutability" 387 of our mind and of its
laws and the belief that the human race can undertake to control its
own development. This idea that the human mind can, as it were,
lift itself

up by its own bootstraps, has remained a dominant charmost sociology to the present day, 388 and we have here

acteristic of

the root (or rather one of the roots, the other being Hegel) of that
hubris which has found its most perfect expression in the so-

modem

called "sociology of knowledge."

And

the fact that this idea of the

controlling its own development has from its beginning
been one of the leading ideas of sociology also provides the link
which has always connected it with socialist ideals so that in the

human mind

popular mind sociological and
It is this

of

human

socialist often

mean

the

same

thing.

389

search for the "general laws of the continuous variations

opinions"

89

which Comte

calls the "historical

method,"

391
But alcomplement of the positive logic."
this
what
under
Comte's
is
the
term
historiinfluence,
though, partly
cal method increasingly came to mean in the second half of the nine-

the "indispensable

teenth century, we cannot leave this subject without pointing out that
of course, nearly the opposite of what historical approach really
means or did mean to the great historians who in the beginning of
the century tried by the application of the historical method to underit is,

stand the genesis of social institutions. 892

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

181

7.
It is hardly surprising that, with this ambitious
conception of
the task of the single theoretical science of society which he admits
into his system, Comte should have nothing but contempt for the al-

ready existing social disciplines. It would hardly be worth while to
dwell on this attitude if it were not so characteristic of the view taken

by men blinded by the scientistic
and
if
his
own
efforts
had
not, at least in part, to be exprejudice,
his
almost
plained by
complete ignorance of the achievements of the
then existing social sciences. Some, as particularly the study of lan393
But he takes the
guage, he regards as hardly worth mentioning.
trouble to denounce political economy at some length, and here his
severity stands in a strange contrast to his exceedingly slender knowledge of the object of his abuse. Indeed, as even one of his admirers,
who has devoted a whole book to Comte's relation to economics, 394
could not help emphasizing, his knowledge of economics was practically non-existent. He knew and even admired Adam Smith, partly
at all times of the social sciences

work in economics, but mainly for his History of
In
his
Astronomy.
early years he had made the acquaintance of J. B.
Say and some other members of the same circle, particularly Destutt

for his descriptive

de Tracy. But the latter's treatment of economics in his great treatise
on "ideology" between logic and morals appeared to Comte merely
a frank admission of the "metaphysical" character of economics. 395
For the rest, the economists did not seem to Comte to be worth
bothering about. He knew a priori that they had merely performed
their necessary destructive role, typical representatives of the negative
or revolutionary spirit which was characteristic of the metaphysical

phase. That no positive contribution to the reorganization of society
could be expected from them was evident from the fact that they had
not been trained as scientists: "being almost invariably lawyers or

men, they had no opportunity of discipline in that spirit of
positive rationality which they suppose they have introduced into
their researches. Precluded by their education from any idea of scientific observation of even the smallest phenomena, from any notions
of natural laws, from all perception of what demonstration is, they
must obviously be incapable of applying a method in which they had
no practice to the most difficult of all analyses." 396 Comte indeed
would admit to the study of sociology only men who had successively
literary

182

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 6F SCIENCE

and successfully mastered

all

the other sciences

prepared themselves for the most

and thus properly

difficult task of the

study of the

most complex of all phenomena. 397 Although the further development of the new science could not again present difficulties as great
as those he had himself surmounted in first creating it, 398 only the
very best minds could hope successfuly to grapple with them. The
special difficulty of this task arises from the absolute necessity of
dealing with all aspects of society at the same time, a necessity dicby the particularly close "consensus" of all social phenomena.
sinned against this principle and to have attempted to deal
with economic phenomena in isolation, "apart from the analysis of
the intellectual, moral, and political state of society," 399 is one of his
main reproaches against the economists. Their "pretended science"
presents to "all competent and experienced judges most decidedly
the character of purely metaphysical concepts." 40 "If one considers
impartially the sterile disputes which divide them concerning the
most elementary concepts of value, utility, production, etc., one may
tated

To have

fancy oneself attending the strangest debates of medieval scholastics

on the fundamental
the main defect of

attributes of their metaphysical entities." 401
political

economy

is

But

conclusion, "the sterile
the belief that there is no

its

402

aphorism of absolute industrial liberty,"
need of some "special institution immediately charged with the task
of regularizing the spontaneous co-ordination" which should be regarded as merely offering the opportunity for imposing real organiAnd he particularly condemns the tendency of political
economy to "answer to all complaints that in the long run all classes,
and especially the one most injured on the existing occasion, will

zation. 403

enjoy a real and permanent satisfaction; a reply which will be re-

garded as derisive, as long as man's
nitely lengthened."

life is

incapable of being indefi-

404

cannot be too much emphasized in any discussion of Comte's
philosophy that he had no use for any knowledge of which he did not
8.

It

see the practical use. 405
social philosophy

is

to

And

"the purpose of the establishment of

re-establish order in

seems to him "more repugnant to the

society."

406

Nothing
even

real scientific spirit, not

the theological spirit," 407 than disorder of any kind, and nothing

is

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

183

perhaps more characteristic of the whole of Comte's work than "the
"
inordinate demand for 'unity' and 'systematization'
which J. S. Mill
described as the fons errorum of all Comte's later speculations. 408
But even if the "frenzy for regulation" 409 is not quite as preponderit became in the Syst&me de philosophic positive,
the practical conclusions to which the Cours leads, just because they
are still free from the fantastic exaggeration of the later work, show

ant in the Cours as

this feature already in a marked degree. With the establishment of
the "definitive" 41 philosophy, positivism, the critical doctrine which
has characterized the preceding period of transition has completed
its

historic mission

and the accompanying dogma of the unbounded

411
To make the writing of the
liberty of conscience will disappear.
Cours possible was, as it were, the last necessary function of "the

revolutionary
achieved, the

dogma of
dogma has

free

enquiry,"

412

but

now

that

this

is

lost its justification. All

knowledge being
once again unified, as it has not been since the theological stage
began to decay, the next task is to set up a new intellectual government where only the competent scientists will be allowed to decide
the difficult social questions. 413 Since their action will in all respects
be determined by the dictates of science, this will not mean arbitrary

government, and "true liberty," which is nothing else than "a rational
submission to the preponderance of the laws of nature," 414 will even

be increased.

The detail of the social organization which positive science will impose need not concern us here. So far as economic life is concerned,
it still resembles in many respects the earlier Saint-Simonian plans,
particularly in so far as the leading role of the bankers in guiding industrial activity

is

concerned. 415 But he dissents from the later out-

right socialism of the Saint-Simonians. Private property is not to be
abolished, but the rich become the "necessary depositaries of the
417

418

and the owning of property a social function.
public capitals"
This is not the only point in which Comte's system resembles the
later authoritarian socialism which we associate with Prussia rather
than socialism as we used to know it. In fact in some passages this
resemblance with Prussian socialism, even down to the very words
used, is really amazing. Thus when he argues that in the future society the

"immoral" concept of individual

rights will disappear

and

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

184

there will be only duties, 418 or that in the new society there will be
no private persons but only state functionaries of various units and
419

and that in consequence the most humble occupation will
be ennobled by its incorporation into the official hierarchy just as the
most obscure soldier has his dignity as a result of the solidarity of
grades,

the military organism, 420 or finally when, in the concluding section
of the first sketch of the future order, he discovers a "special disposi-

command

some and towards obedience in others" and
we all know "how sweet it is
we might match almost every sentence with identical

tion towards

in

assures us that in our innermost heart
to obey," 421

statements of recent

German

theoreticians

who

laid the intellectual

foundations of the doctrines of the Third Reich. 422 Having been led
by his philosophy to take over from the reactionary Bonald the view
423

is "a pure abstraction"
and society as a whole
a single collective being, he is of necessity led to most of the characteristic features of a totalitarian view of society.

that the individual

The

later

into a new Religion of Humanity
outside our subject. Needless to say
was so completely a stranger to the one real cult of

development of

with a fully developed cult
that

Comte, who

all this
is

humanity, tolerance (which he would admit only in indifferent and
doubtful matters), 424 was not the man to make much of that idea,

which

in itself does not lack a certain greatness.

not better summarize

this last

For the

rest

we can-

phase of Comte's thought than by the

well-known epigram of Thomas Huxley, who described

it

as

"Ca-

tholicism minus Christianity."
9.

Before

we

cast a glance

on the

direct influence of

Comte's

main work we must

briefly consider certain simultaneous and in a
sense parallel efforts which, from the same intellectual background,
but by a different route, produced an impression which tended to

strengthen the tendencies of which Comte's
sentative.

The Belgian astronomer and

work

is

statistician

the

main repre-

Quetelet,

who

in the first place, differs from Comte not
in his own field but also by the great
scientist
great

must be mentioned here
only by being a

contributions which he has

made

to the

methods of

social study.

He

did this precisely by that application of mathematics to social study
which Comte condemned. Through his application of the "Gaussian"

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

185

normal curve of error

more than any other

to the analysis of statistical data he became,
single person, the founder of modern statistics

and particularly of its application to social phenomena. The value of
achievement is undisputed and indisputable. But in the general
atmosphere in which Quetelet's work became known the belief was
bound to arise that the statistical methods, which he had so successfully applied to some problems of social life, were destined to become
this

method of study.
to create that belief.

the sole
little

The

intellectual

And

Quetelet himself contributed not a

environment out of which Quetelet rose

425

is

ex-

actly the same as that of Comte: it was the French mathematicians of
the circle of the Ecole poly technique
above all Laplace and

Fourier, from whom he drew the inspiration for the application of
the theory of probability to the problem of social statistics, and in
most respects he, much more than Comte, must be regarded as the
true continuer of their

work proper

work and

of that of Condorcet. His statistical

was the general effect of his demonstration that something like the methods of the natural sciences
could be applied to certain mass phenomena of society and of his
is

not our concern.

It

implied and even explicit demand that all problems of social science
should be treated in a similar fashion, which operated in a direction
parallel to Comte's teaching. Nothing fascinated the ensuing generation so much as Quetelet's "average man" and his celebrated con-

clusion of his studies of moral statistics that

"we pass from one year

to another with the sad perspective of seeing the same crimes reproduced in the same order and calling down the same punishments in

We might
the same proportions. Sad condition of humanity!
enumerate in advance how many individuals will stain their hands in
the blood of their fellows, how many will be forgers, how many will
be poisoners, almost we can enumerate in advance how many births
and deaths there should occur. There is a budget which we pay with
a frightful regularity; it is that of prisons, chains and the scaffold." 427
His views on the application of the mathematical methods have be.

come more

characteristic of later positivist

.

.

method than anything de-

riving directly from Comte: "The more advanced the sciences have
become, the more they have tended to enter the domain of mathematics, which is a sort of center towards which they converge. We

186

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

can judge of the perfection to which a science has come by the famore or less great, with which it may be approached by calcu-

cility,

lation." 428

Although Comte had condemned this view and particularly all
attempts to find social laws by means of statistics, his and Quetelef s
general endeavors to find natural laws of the development of the

human

race as a whole, to extend the Laplacean conception of uni-

versal determinism to cultural

phenomena, and

to

make mass phe-

nomena

the sole object of the science of society were sufficiently akin
to lead to a gradual fusion of their doctrines.

In the same category of contemporary efforts with similar methodological tendencies we must at least briefly mention the work of

Le

and ex-Saint-Simonian, whose descriptive
model of much later sociological work.
from
Comte
as well as Quetelet in more respects
Though differing
than they have in common, he contributed like them to the reaction
against theoretical individualism, classical economics, and political
F.

Play, polytechnician
became the

social surveys

liberalism, thus strengthening the particular effects of the scientistic
influences with which we are here concerned. 429

10.
The tracing of influences is the most treacherous ground in
the history of thought and we have in the last chapter already so
much sinned against the canons of caution in this field that we shall

now be

brief.

Yet the curious course which Comte's influence took

is

so important for the understanding of the intellectual history of the
nineteenth century, and the cause of so many still prevailing mis-

conceptions about his role, that a few more words about it are indispensable. In France, as already observed, Comte's immediate
influence

on thinkers of importance was

points out, "the great treatise of
in French literature or criticism,

small. But, as J. S. Mill

M. Comte was scarcely mentioned
when it was already working pow-

on the minds of many British students and thinkers." 43 It
was this influence on Mill himself and a few other leading English
thinkers which became decisive for Comte's effect on European
481
Mill himself, in the sixth book of his Logic, which deals
thought.
with the methods of the moral sciences, became little more than an
expounder of Comtian doctrine. The philosopher George Lewes and
erfully

SOCIOLOGY: COMTE, AND HIS SUCCESSORS

187

better known names of Comte's English
nothing could be more characteristic of the tremendous impact of Comte on England than that the same Miss Martineau who in her younger years had been the faithful and most

George Eliot are some of the
adherents.

And

successful popularizer of Ricardo's economics, should become, not
only the translator and most skilful condenser of Comte's work, but
also one of his most enthusiastic disciples. As important almost as

Mill himself for the spreading of positivist views
social

phenomena was

although in

this

among

students of

the historian H. T. Buckle,

their

adoption by
case the influence of Comte was reinforced and per-

haps outweighed by that of Quetelet.
It was largely through the medium of these English writers that

Comtian positivism made its entry into Germany. 432 Mill's Logic,
Buckle's and Lecky's historical works, and later Herbert Spencer,

made Comte's
unaware of

many

of the

many who were

ideas familiar to

often completely
doubtful
whether
although
perhaps
who
in
the
second
half
of
the ninescholars

their source.

German

And

it is

teenth century professed views closely similar to Comte's had derived them directly from him, there were probably in no other country a greater

number

of influential

men who

tried to

reform the social

on essentially Comtean lines. No other country seems at that
time to have been more receptive of new ideas, and positivist thought
together with Quetelet's new statistical methods was definitely the
fashion of the period and was accepted in Germany with correspondsciences

433
ing enthusiasm.

where)

The

curious

positivist influences

phenomenon that there (and elseshould have so readily combined with

that of Hegel will require separate investigation.
have no space here more than briefly to mention the successors

We

which in France at last took up the Comtian tradition. Before we
mention the sociologists proper we must at least mention the names
of Taine and Renan, both, incidentally, representatives of that curious combination of Comtian and Hegelian thought to which we have
just referred. Of the sociologists almost all the best-known ones (with
the exception of Tarde), Espinas, L6vy-Bruhl, Durkheim, Simiand,
stand directly in the Comtian tradition, although in their case, too,
this

has in part

come back

modifications which

it

to

France via Germany and with the

there experienced. 434

To

attempt to trace this

188

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

later influence of
lic

would mean

for a time

it

Comte on French thought during

the Third

Repubwhere
minds

to write a history of sociology in the country
gained the greatest influence. Many of the best

who devoted themselves to social studies were here attracted by
new science and it is perhaps not too much to suggest that the

the

pe-

culiar stagnation of French economics during that period is at least
partly due to the predominance of the sociological approach to social
435

phenomena.
That Comte's

direct influence remained confined to comparatively
but
that
few,
through these very few it extended exceedingly far, is
even more true of the present generation than it was of earlier ones.
There will be few students of the social sciences now who have ever

read Comte or know much about him. But the number of those who
have absorbed most of the important elements of his system through
the intermediation of a few very influential representatives of his
43C in
tradition, such as Henry Carey and T. Veblen
America, J. K.
437
in England, or K. LamIngram, W. Ashley and L. T. Hobhouse
438
and K. Breysig in Germany, is very large indeed. Why this
precht
influence of Comte should so frequently have been much more effective in an indirect manner, those who have attempted to study his
work will have no difficulty in understanding.

Part Three

COMTE AND HEGEL

COMTE AND HEGEL
1

THE

DISCUSSIONS of every age are filled with the issues on which its
leading schools of thought differ. But the general intellectual atmosphere of the time is always determined by the views on which the

opposing schools agree. They become the unspoken presuppositions
all thought, the common and unquestioningly accepted founda-

of

tions

on which

discussion proceeds.
longer share these implicit assumptions of ages long
comparatively easy to recognize them. But it is different
all

When we no
past,

it

is

with regard to the ideas underlying the thought of more recent times.
Here we are frequently not yet aware of the common features which
the opposing systems of thought shared, ideas which for that very
reason often have crept in almost unnoticed and have achieved their

dominance without serious examination. This can be very important
because, as Bernard Bosanquet once pointed out, "extremes of
*
thought may meet in error as well as in truth." Such errors sometimes become dogmas merely because they were accepted by the
different groups who quarreled on all the live issues, and may even
continue to provide the tacit foundations of thought when most of
the theories are forgotten which divided the thinkers to whom we

owe

that legacy.

When

this is the case, the history of ideas

becomes a subject of

eminently practical importance. It can help us to become aware of
much that governs our own thought without our explicitly knowing
It may serve the purposes of a psychoanalytical operation by
bringing to the surface unconscious elements which determine our
reasoning, and perhaps assist us to purge our minds from influences
it.

which seriously mislead us on questions of our own day.
191

192

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

to suggest that we are in such a position.
thesis
field of social thought not only the second half of
the nineteenth century but also our own age owes much of its char-

My purpose

will

My

is

be that in the

approach to the agreement between two thinkers who are
commonly regarded as complete intellectual antipodes: the German
"idealist" Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and the French "positivist" Auguste Comte. In some respects these two men do indeed
represent such complete extremes of philosophical thought that they
seem to belong to different ages and scarcely even to talk about the
same problems. But my concern here will be only incidentally with
their philosophical systems as a whole. It will be chiefly with their
acteristic

influence

on

social theory. It

is

in this field that the influence of

philosophical ideas can be most profound and most lasting. And
there is, perhaps, no better illustration of the far-reaching effects of
the most abstract ideas than the one I intend to discuss.

2.

suggestion that in these manners we have to deal with a
influence of Hegel and Comte has still so much the air of a

The

common

paradox that

I

had

better say at once that I

am by no means

the

notice similarities between them. I could give you a long list,
shall presently mention a few outstanding examples, of students

first to

and

of the history of ideas who have pointed out such resemblances. The
curious fact is that these observations have again and again been
made with the air of surprise and discovery, and that their authors

uneasy about their own temerity and afraid of
going beyond pointing out a few isolated points of agreement. If I
am not mistaken, these coincidences go much further, however, and,
in their effects on the social sciences, were much more important
than has yet been realized.
always seem a

little

Before I mention some instances of such earlier notice

I

must,

however, correct a common mistake which is largely responsible for
the neglect of the whole issue. It is the belief that the similarities are

due to an influence which Hegel exercised on Comte. 2 This belief is
due mainly to the fact that the publication of Comte's ideas is commonly dated from the appearance of the six volumes of his Cours de
Philosophic Positive from 1830 to 1842, while Hegel died in 1831.
All the essential ideas of Comte were, however, expounded by him

COMTE AND HEGEL

1 93

in his youthful System of Positive Polity; 3 and this
opuscule fondamentale, as he later called it, appeared also as one of

as early as

1822

works of the Saint-Simonian group and as such probably reached
a wider audience and exercised a greater influence than the Cours
immediately did. It seems to me to be one of the most pregnant tracts
of the nineteenth century, infinitely more brilliant than the now betthe

ter

known ponderous volumes

of the Cours. But even the Cours,

more than an elaboration of the ideas sketched in that
small tract, was planned as early as 1826 and delivered as a series of
lectures before a distinguished audience in 1828. 4 Comte's main ideas
were thus published within a year of Hegel's Philosophy of Law,
which

is little

within a couple of years of the Encyklopaedie, and of course before
the posthumous appearance of the Philosophy of History, to mention
only Hegel's main works which are relevant here. In other words,

Comte was

Hegel's junior by twenty-eight years, we must
regard them to all intents and purposes as contemporaries, and there
would be about as much justification for thinking that Hegel might

although

have been influenced by Comte, as that Comte was influenced by
Hegel.

You will now appreciate the significance of the first, and in many
ways the most remarkable, instance in which the similarity between
the two thinkers was noticed. In 1824 Comte's young pupil Gustave
d'Eichthal went to study in Germany. In his letters to Comte he soon
5
reported excitedly from Berlin about his discovery of Hegel. "There
is," he wrote with regard to Hegel's lectures on the philosophy of
history, "a marvelous agreement between your results, even though
the principles are different, at least in appearance." He went on to
say that "the identity of results exists even in the practical principles,
Hegel is a defender of the governments, that is to say, an enemy of

as

the liberals." A few weeks later d'Eichthal was able to report that
he had presented a copy of Comte's tract to Hegel, who had expressed
satisfaction and greatly praised the first part, although he had doubts

about the meaning of the method of observation recommended in
the second part. And Comte not much later even expressed the naive

hope that "Hegel seemed to him in Germany the man most capable
to push the positive philosophy." 6
The later instances in which the similarity has been noticed are

194

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

numerous, as I have already said. But although such widely used
books as R. Flint's Philosophy of History 7 and J. T. Merz's History
of European Thought* comment upon it, and such distinguished
and diverse scholars as Alfred Fouillee 9 fimile Meyerson, 10 Thomas
11
Ernst Troeltsch, 12 and Eduard Spranger 13 have discussed
Wittaker,
14
I will keep for a note a score of other names I could mention
it
little attempt has yet been made at a systematic examination of
these similarities, though I must not omit mention of Friedrich Dittmann's comparative study of the philosophies of history of Comte
and Hegel, 15 on which I shall draw in some measure.
3.

More

who have

significant, perhaps,

noticed the similarities

of the last hundred years

more

who

than any
is

list

of the

names of those

the long series of social thinkers

testify to this

kinship in a different and

manner. Indeed, still more surprising than the neglect
of the similarities in the two original doctrines is the similar failure to
notice the surprising number of leading figures who succeeded in
combining in their own thought ideas derived from Hegel and Comte.
16
Again, I can quote only a few of the names which belong here. But
if I tell you that the list includes Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and
probably Ludwig Feuerbach in Germany, Ernest Renan, Hippolyte
Taine, and Emile Durkheim in France, Giuseppe Mazzini in Italy
and I should probably add Benedetto Croce and John Dewey from
effective

you will begin to see how far this influence reaches. When
have occasion to show how we can trace to the same
source such widespread intellectual movements as that peculiarly unhistorical approach to history which paradoxically is called historicism, much of what has been known as sociology during the last hundred years, and especially its most fashionable and most ambitious
the living

later I shall

branch, the sociology of knowledge, you will perhaps understand the

importance which I attach to this combined influence.
Before addressing myself to my main task, I must go through one
more preliminary: I ought, in fairness, to acquaint you with a serious
deficiency with which I approach it. So far as Comte is concerned, it
is

true that I strongly disagree with

most of

his views.

But

this disa-

greement is still of a kind which leaves room for profitable discussion
because there exists at least some common basis. If it is true that criti-

COMTE AND HEGEL
cism

is

worth-while only

least this degree of

when one approaches

am

sympathy, I

1 95

one's object with at

afraid I cannot claim this quali-

fication with regard to Hegel. Concerning him I have always felt, not
only what his greatest British admirer said, that his philosophy was

u

a scrutiny of thought so profound that it was for the most part
17
but also what John Stuart Mill experienced who

unintelligible,"

"found by actual experience
that conversancy with him tends to
18
one's
I
intellect."
deprave
ought to warn you, therefore, that I do
not pretend to understand Hegel. But, fortunately for my task, a
comprehension of his system as a whole is not necessary. I think I
know well enough those parts of his doctrines which have, or are
.

.

.

supposed to have, influenced the development of the social sciences.
Indeed, they are so well known that my task will consist largely in
showing that many of the developments commonly ascribed to
Hegel's influence might well in fact be due to Comte's. It seems to
me that it is largely the support which the Hegelian tradition re-

ceived from this quarter that accounts for the otherwise inexplicable
fact that in the social sciences Hegelian thought and language continued to rule for so long after, in the other fields of science, the rule

of his philosophy

had long been superseded by

that of exact science.

4.
There is one feature, however, which their general theories of
knowledge have in common, and which I must mention for its own
sake as well as because it will give me an opportunity to refer to an
interesting question which I shall not have time to consider elsewhere

in this paper: the original source of their

The
first

common

point of their doctrines to which I refer

they

may appear

ideas.

is

one on which

at

to hold diametrically

opposed views: their
this constitutes the whole

attitude to empirical research. For Comte
of science; for Hegel it is entirety outside

what he calls science,
no
underrates
the
means
he
importance of factual knowlalthough
by
its
What
them
within
together is their belief
brings
edge
sphere.
that empirical science must be purely descriptive, confined to establishing regularities of the observed phenomena. They are both strict
phenomenalists in this sense, denying that empirical science can
proceed from description to explanation. That the positivist Comte
regards all explanation, all discussion of the manner in which the

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

196

phenomena

are produced, as futile metaphysics, while Hegel reserves

to his idealistic philosophy of nature, is a different matter. In their
views on the functions of empirical research they agree almost comit

When Hegel
beautifully shown.
has
no
to assert
for
science
business
that
argues,
example,
"empirical
20
the existence of anything that is not given to sense perception,"
pletely,

as Emile

he

much

is

as

Now

this

19

Meyerson has

a positivist as Comte.

phenomenalist approach to the problems of empirical
modern times without question from Descartes, to

science derives in

both philosophers are directly indebted. And the same is, I
believe, true of the second basic feature which they have in common

whom

and which

will

they agree:

show up

strongly in the

more

detailed points

on which

common rationalism, or better, intellectualism. It
who first combined these apparently incompatible ideas

their

was Descartes

of a phenomenalist or sensualist approach to physical science and a
rationalist view of man's task and functions. 21 With respect to the

we are chiefly interested, it was mainly through
23
22
d'Alembert,
Montesquieu,
Turgot, and Condorcet in France,
24
Kant, and Fichte in Germany, that the Cartesian heritage
Herder,
was passed on to Hegel and Comte. But what in those men had been
merely bold and stimulating suggestions became with our two philospoints in which

ophers the bases of the two ruling systems of thought of their time.
In thus stressing the common Cartesian origin of what I believe to be

common

and Comte, I wish, of course, not in the
which Descartes has rendered
to modern thought. But as has been true with so many fertile ideas,
the

errors of Hegel

least to deprecate the great services

a stage

is

when their very success brings about
which they are no longer appropriate.
what Comte and Hegel have done.

often reached

application to fields in
this, I believe, is

5.

When we

turn to the field of social theory

we

their

And

find that the cen-

which Hegel and Comte have in common are so closely related that we can almost express them all in one sentence, if we give
due weight to every single word. Such a statement would have to run
somewhat like this: the central aim of all study of society must be to
tral ideas

construct a universal history of all mankind, understood as a scheme
of the necessary development of humanity according to recognizable

COMTE AND HEGEL
laws. It

is

characteristic of the extent to

which

their ideas

197

have en-

tered into the whole intellectual

make-up of our time, that, thus
baldly stated, they now sound almost commonplace. Only when we
analyze in greater detail the meaning and the implications of this
statement do we become aware of the extraordinary nature of the

undertaking which it proposes.
The laws which both seek

Comte

presents them

and

it

makes

little

difference that

as "natural laws" 25 while for

Hegel they are
instances laws of the developboth claim, in other words, that our

are in the

first

metaphysical principles
ment of the human mind. They
individual minds, which contribute to this process of development,
are at the same time capable of comprehending it as a whole. It is the

necessary succession of stages of the human mind determined by
these dynamic laws which accounts for a corresponding succession of
different civilizations, cultures, Volksgeister, or social systems.

common

Their

development
fact

that

the

most

came misleadingly
history.

stress

on

predominance of the intellectual
no way conflicts with the
tradition which they both inspired

the

in this process, incidentally, in

Comte,

influential

to

be called the "materialist" interpretation of

in this as in

many

other points nearer to

Marx

than

Hegel, laid the foundation for this development with his stress on
the predominant importance of our knowledge of nature; and the
basic contention of the so-called materialist (or better, technological)
interpretation of history is, after all, merely that it is our knowledge

of nature and of technological possibilities which governs the development in other fields. The essential point, the belief that one's own

mind should be capable
and future development

of explaining
I

itself,

and the laws of

cannot explain here

to involve a contradiction 26

is

by Marx, and through him by

the

why

to

me

its

this

past

seems

same with both, and it is derived
from Hegel and Comte.

his disciples,

The conception of laws of succession of distinct stages in the development of the human mind in general, and in all its particular maniand concretizations, of course implies that these wholes or
collectives can be directly apprehended as individuals of a species:
that we can directly perceive civilizations or social systems as objectively given facts. Such a claim is not surprising in a system of ideal-

festations

ism

like Hegel's, that

is,

as a product of a conceptual realism or of

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

198

"essentialism."

tem

like

27

But

it

seems

Comte's. The fact

at first out of place in a naturalist sys-

however, that his phenomenalism which
mental constructions and allows him to admit only of what
is,

eschews all
can be directly observed, forces him into a position very similar to
Hegel's. Since he cannot deny the existence of social structures, he
must claim that they are immediately given to experience. In fact, he
goes so far as to claim that the social wholes are undoubtedly better
known and more directly observable than the elements of which they
28

and that therefore social theory must start from our knowl29
the
Thus he, no less than
of
edge
directly apprehended wholes.
from
abstract
starts
Hegel,
intuitively apprehended
concepts of society

consist,

or civilization, and then deductively derives from it his knowledge of
the structure of the object. He even goes so far, surprisingly enough
in a positivist, as to claim explicitly that from this conception of the
total

we can

derive a priori knowledge about the necessary relations

of the parts. 30 It

which

Comte's positivism has
sometimes been described as a system of idealism. 31 Like Hegel he
treats as "concrete universals" 32 those social structures which in fact
is

this

justifies it if

we come to know only by composing them, or building them up,
from the familiar elements; and he even surpasses Hegel in claiming
that only society as a whole is real and that the individual is only an
abstraction. 33

6.

The

similarity of the treatment of social evolution
far beyond these methodological aspects.

by Hegel
For both,
Both compare

and Comte goes

society appears as an organism in a fairly literal sense.
the stages through which social evolution must pass with the different

ages through which individual

man

Neither

speaking

Comte nor Hegel was
although

it is

And
man
is
by

passes in his natural growth.

for both, the growth of the conscious control of his destiny
the main content of history.

of course a historian, properly
it was the fashion to

not so very long since

describe them, in contrast to their predecessors, as "true historians"

34

"scientific," which, presumably, meant that they
aimed at the discovery of laws. But what they presented as the "historical method" soon began to displace the approach of the great
historical school of a Niebuhr or a Ranke. It is customary to trace to

because they were

COMTE AND HEGEL
Hegel the

199

rise of the later historicism 35

with its belief in the necessary
succession of "stages" which manifest themselves in all fields of social
life; but Comte's influence had probably more to do with it than
Hegel's.

In the confused state of terminology on these matters, 36 it is perhaps necessary to say explicitly that I draw a sharp distinction

between the "historical school" of the early nineteenth century and
the majority of the later professional historians, and the historicism
of a Marx, a Schmoller, or a Sombart. It was the latter who believed
that with the discovery of laws of development they had the only key
to true historical understanding, and who in an altogether unjustified

arrogance claimed that the earlier writers, and particularly those of

had been "unhistorical." It seems to me that
David
Hume, for example, had much more justifimany respects
cation when he believed his "to be the historical age and [his] to be
the eighteenth century,
in

the historical nation" 87 than the historicists

The abuses

who

tried to turn history

which this historicism ultimately led is best seen by the fact that even a thinker so close to it as
Max Weber was once driven to describe the whole Entwicklungsgedanke as a "romantic swindle." 38 I have little to add to the masterly
analysis of this historicism by my friend Karl Popper, hidden away
in a wartime volume of Economical except that the responsibility
for it seems to me to rest at least as much with Comte and positivism
as with Plato and Hegel.
into a theoretical science.

to

This historicism, let me repeat, was much less an affair of the historians proper than of the representatives of the other social sciences
who applied what they believed to be the "historical method." Gustav
Schmoller, the founder of the younger historical school in economics,
is perhaps the best example of one who was clearly guided by the
rather than that of Hegel. 40 But if the influence
of this icind of historicism was perhaps most marked in economics, it

philosophy of

Comte

was a fashion which,
all

first

in

Germany and then elsewhere,
shown to have influenced

the social sciences. It could be
41

affected

the his-

no less than anthropology or philology. And the great
which
"philosophies of history" have enjoyed during the
popularity
hundred
last
years, theories which ascribed to the historical process
an intelligible "meaning" and which pretended to show us a recog-

tory of art

200

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

nizable destiny of mankind, is essentially the result of this joint
influence of Hegel and Comte.
I will not dwell here on another and perhaps only superficial
7.
resemblance between their theories: the fact that with Comte the
necessary development proceeds according to the famous law of the

three stages, while with Hegel a similar threefold rhythm is the result
of the growth of mind as a dialectical process which proceeds from
thesis to antithesis

and

synthesis.

More important

is

the fact that for

men

history leads to a predetermined end, that it can be interpreted teleologically as a succession of achieved purposes.

both

Their historical determinism
historical events are

by which

is

meant, not merely that

somehow determined, but that we are
were bound to take a particular course

able to

necesthey
the
man
course
a
cannot
change
sarily implies
thorough fatalism:
of history. Even the outstanding individuals are, with Comte, merely

recognize

why

42

or "organs of a predestined movement," 43 or with
Hegel Geschaftsfuhrer des Weltgeistes, managers of the World Spirit
whom Reason cunningly uses for its own purposes.

"instruments"

is
is,

There is no room for freedom in such a system: for Comte freedom
"the rational submission to the domination of natural laws," 44 that
of course, his natural laws of inevitable development; for Hegel it is
And since both are in possession of

the recognition of necessity. 45
the secret of the "definitive
to

which evolution

is

and permanent intellectual unity" 46
tending according to Comte, or of the "absolute

truth" in Hegel's sense, they both claim for themselves the right to
impose a new orthodoxy. But I have to admit that in this as in many

other respects the much abused Hegel is still infinitely more liberal
than the "scientific" Comte. There are in Hegel no such fulminations
against the unlimited liberty of conscience as we find throughout the
of Comte, and Hegel's attempt to use the machinery of the

work

Prussian state to impose an official doctrine 47 appears very tame compared with Comte's plan for a new "religion of humanity" and all his
other thoroughly anti-liberal schemes for regimentation which even
his old admirer John Stuart Mill ultimately branded as "liberticide." 48
I have not the time to show in any detail how these similar political
attitudes are reflected in equally similar evaluations of different his-

COMTE AND HEGEL
torical periods or of different institutions. I will

201

merely mention, as

two thinkers show the same dislike
of Periclean Greece and of the Renaissance, and the same admiration

particularly characteristic, that the

for Frederick the Great. 49
8.
The last major point of agreement between Hegel and Comte
which I will mention is no more than a consequence of their historicism. But it has exercised so much independent influence that I must
discuss it separately. It is their thorough moral relativism, their conviction either that all moral rules can be recognized as justified by the
circumstances of the time, or that only those are valid which can be
thus explicitly justified
it is not always clear which they mean. This
idea is, of course, merely an application of historical determinism, of
the belief that we can adequately explain why people at different
times believed what they actually did believe. This pretended insight
into the manner in which people's thought is determined implies the
claim that we can know what they ought to believe in given circumstances, and the dismissal as irrational or inappropriate of all moral
rules which cannot be thus justified.
In this connection historicism shows most clearly its rationalist

or intellectualist character:

50

Since the determination of

all historical

development
intelligible, only such forces as can be fully
understood by us can have been at work. Comte's attitude on this is
really not very different from Hegel's statement that all that is real
is

is

rational

and

to

all

be

that

is

rational

is

also real 51

only that instead of

Comte would have

said historically necessary and therefore
justified. Everything appears to him as in this sense justified in its

rational

time, slavery

and

cruelty, superstition

and

intolerance, because

this

he does not say but it is implied in his reasoning there are no moral
rules which we must accept as transcending our individual reason,
nothing which is a given and unconscious presupposition of all our
thought, and by which we must judge moral issues. Indeed, he significantly could not conceive otany other possibility except either a
system of morals designed and revealed by a higher being, or one

demonstrated by our

own

reason. 52

And between

these

two the neceshim unques-

sary superiority of the "demonstrated morals" seemed to

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

202

tionable.

first

Comte was both more

consistent

and more extreme than

He had

indeed already stated the main conception in his very
publication when, at the age of nineteen, he wrote: "There is

Hegel.

nothing good and nothing bad, absolutely speaking; everything
relative, this is the
It is possible,

am

only absolute statement."

however, that with regard to

attributing too

much importance

is

53

this particular

to the influence of

point I

our two

philosophers, and that they were merely following a general fashion
of their time which fitted in with their systems of thought. How
rapidly moral relativism was then spreading we can see clearly in an
interesting exchange of letters between Thomas Carlyle and John

As early as January 1833 we find Carlyle writing to Mill
with reference to a recently published History of the French Revolution: 54 "Has not this man Thiers a wonderful system of Ethics in
petto? He will prove to you that the power to have done a thing

Stuart Mill.

almost

(if

not altogether) gave you the right to do it: every hero of
he has succeeded in doing." 55

his turns out to be perfectly justified

To which

Mill replied:

"You have

most accurately. I am afraid
young French Litterateurs, and that

ethics

characterized Thiers' system of
is too just a specimen of the

it

this is all

cally speaking, of their attempts to imitate the

they have made, ethi-

Germans

in identifying

themselves with the past. By dint of shifting their point of view to
make it accord with that of whomever they are affecting to judge,

coupled with their historical fatalism, they have arrived at the annimoral distinctions except success and not success." 56 It

hilation of all

who knew

very well how these ideas had been
spread in France by the Saint-Simonians, yet explicitly ascribes their
appearance in a young French historian to German influence.

is

interesting that Mill,

That these views lead both Comte and Hegel to a complete moral
and legal positivism 57 and at times desperately close to the doctrine
I can mention only in passing. I believe that
that Might is Right
quite a

good case could be made out

sources of the

modern

that they are

tradition of legal positivism. It

among
is,

the

main

after all, only

another manifestation of the same general attitude that refuses to
admit anything as relevant which cannot be recognized as the expression of conscious reason.

COMTE AND HEGEL
This brings

9.

me back

to the

common

203

central idea which under-

these particular similarities of the doctrines of Comte and
Hegel: the idea that we can improve upon the results of the earlier
individualist approaches with their modest endeavor to understand

lies

all

how

individual minds interact, by studying Human Reason, with a
capital R, from the outside as it were, as something objectively given

and observable as a whole, as it might appear to some supermind.
the belief that they had achieved the old ambition of se ipsam
cognoscere mentem, and that they had reached a position where they
were able to predict the future course of the growth of Reason, it was
only one step more to the still more presumptuous idea that Reason

From

should

now be

able to pull

itself

up by

its

own

bootstraps to

its

definitive or absolute state. It is in the last analysis this intellectual

which were sown by Descartes, and perhaps
already by Plato, which is the common trait in Hegel and Comte.
The concern with the movement of Reason as a whole not only

hubris, the seeds of

prevented them from understanding the process through which the
interaction of individuals produced structures of relationships which
performed actions no individual reason could fully comprehend, but
it

also

made them

reason to control

blind to the fact that the attempt of conscious
own development could only have the effect of

its

growth to what the individual directing mind could
Although this aspiration is a direct product of a certain
brand of rationalism, it seems to me to be the result of a misundera rationalism which
stood rationalism, better called intellectualism
limiting this very
foresee. 58

most important task, namely, in recognizing the limits of
what individual conscious reason can accomplish.
Hegel and Comte both singularly fail to make intelligible how the
fails in its

interaction of the efforts of individuals can create something greater
than they know. While Adam Smith and the other great Scottish

even though they spoke of
59
provided such an explanation, all that Hegel
and Comte give us is a mysterious teleological force. And while

individualists of the eighteenth century

the "invisible

hand"

eighteenth-century individualism, essentially humble in its aspirations, aimed at understanding as well as possible the principles by

which the individual efforts combined to produce a civilization in
order to learn what were the conditions most favorable to its further

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

204

Comte became

growth, Hegel and
collectivism

which aims

the

main source of

that hubris of

at "conscious direction" of all forces of

society.

must now attempt

by a few more examwhich the commost interesting
to study in detail would be that once very famous but now largely
forgotten German philosopher, Ludwig Feuerbach. It would be even
more significant if that old Hegelian who became the founder of
German positivism had arrived at that position without any knowl10.

I

to illustrate briefly,

ples, the hints I have already given about the course
mon influence of Hegel and Comte took. One of the

edge of Comte; but circumstances make it very probable that he too
at an early stage become acquainted with Comte's first Systdme.
How enormous his influence was, not only on the other radical Young
Hegelians but on the whole rising generation, is best seen in the

had

account given by Friedrich Engels,
came at once Feuerbachians." 61

who

describes

how

they "all be-

The blend of Hegelianism and positivism which Feuerbach pro62
became characteristic of the thought of the whole group of
German social theorists who appeared in the 1840's. Only one year
vided

Feuerbach had broken away from Hegel because, as he later
he had recognized that the absolute truth meant merely the
absolute professor, 68 the same year in which the last volume of
Comte's Cours appeared and when, incidentally, the young Karl
after

said,

Marx

sent his

author,

first

who was

work

to the printers, namely, in 1842, another
and representative of the time,

very influential

Lorenz von Stein, published his Socialism and Communism in France,
which admittedly attempted a fusion of Hegelian and Saint-Simonian
and therefore Comtian thought. 64 It has often been noticed that in
this

work

Stein anticipated much of the historical theories of Karl
fact becomes even more suggestive when we find that

Marx. 65 This
another
the

man who was

Frenchman

Karl Marx,
was an old Saint-Simonian who

later discovered as a precursor of

Jules Lechevalier,

66
He preceded Stein by
actually studied under Hegel in Berlin.
ten years, but remained for some time an isolated figure in France.
But in Germany Hegelian positivism, if I may so call it, became the

had

dominant trend of thought.

It

was

in this

atmosphere that both Karl

COMTE AND HEGEL
Marx and

Friedrich Engels formed their

now famous

205

theories of

history, largely Hegelian in language but, I believe, much more indebted to Saint-Simon and Comte than is commonly realized. 67 And
it

was those
them to

similarities

which

I

have discussed which made

it

so easy

for

retain Hegelian language for the exposition of a theory
which, as Marx himself said, in some respects turned Hegel upside

down.
probably also more than an accident that it was almost at the
and in 1843, that two men who were much nearer
to a natural science approach to social study than they were to Hegel,
It is

same

time, in 1841
68

and Wilhelm Roscher, 69 began the tradition of historicism in economics which became the model that the other social
sciences soon eagerly followed. It was in those fifteen or twenty years
that the ideas developed and spread which gave
following 1842
Friedrich List

Germany

for the

first

time a leading position in the social sciences;

some extent by way of re-export from Germany (though
also
from
England through Mill and Buckle), that French hispartly
torians and sociologists such as Taine 71 and Durkheim72 became
familiar with the positivist tradition at the same time as with Hegeliand

it

was

to

anism.
It

was under

the banner of this historicism

made

in

Germany

that

in the second half of the ninteenth century the great attack on individualist social theory was conducted, that the very foundations of

and

came

be questioned, and that both
became dominant traditions.
And it was particularly under its influence that, from Marx to Sombart and Spengler, "philosophies of history" became the most influindividualist

liberal society

historical fatalism

and

to

ethical relativism

73
Its
ential expression of the attitude of the age to social problems.

most

characteristic expression, however, is probably the so-called
sociology of knowledge which to the present day in its two distinct

still shows how the two strands of thought
and
Comte
from
Hegel operate sometimes side by side
originating
and sometimes in combination. 74 And, last but not least, most of
modern socialism derives its theoretical foundation from that Alliance

yet closely similar branches

as Celestin Bougie has called it, 75
an alliance of German Hegelianism and

intellectuelle franco-allemande,

which was in the main
French positivism.

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION OF SCIENCE

206
Let

me

conclude

this historical

sketch by one

more remark. After

1859, as far as the social sciences are concerned, the influence of
Darwin could do little more than confirm an already existing tendency. Darwinism may have assisted the introduction into the AngloSaxon world of ready-fashioned evolutionary theories. But if we
examine such scientific "revolutions" as were attempted in the social
sciences under the influence of Darwin, for example
Veblen and his disciples, they appear in fact as little

by Thorstein

more than a

which German historicism had developed under
the influence of Hegel and Comte. I suspect, though I have no proof,
that on closer investigation even this American branch of historicism
would prove to have more direct connections with the original source
revival of the ideas

of these ideas. 76
It is impossible in this brief paper to do full justice to so big
11.
a subject. Least of all can I hope, with the few remarks I have been
able to make on the filiation of ideas, to have convinced you that they

are correct in every detail.

But

I trust I

have

at least

provided

suffi-

cient evidence to persuade you of the burden of my argument: that
we are still, largely without knowing it, under the influence of ideas

which have almost imperceptibly crept into modern thought because
they were shared by the founders of what seemed to be radically opposed traditions. In these matters we are to a great extent still guided

by ideas which are at least a century old, just as the nineteenth century was mainly guided by the ideas of the eighteenth. But while the
ideas of Hume and Voltaire, of Adam Smith and Kant, produced the
liberalism of the nineteenth century, those of Hegel and Comte, of
Feuerbach and Marx, have produced the totalitarianism of the
twentieth.
It

may

well be true that

influence which

we can

we

exercise

as scholars tend to overestimate the

on contemporary

affairs.

But

I

doubt

possible to overestimate the influence which ideas have
in the long run. And there can be no question that it is our special
duty to recognize the currents of thought which still operate in public

whether

it is

opinion, to examine their significance, and, if necessary, to refute
them. It was an attempt to fulfill at least the first part of this duty

which

I

have tried to outline in

this

paper.

NOTES
Part
1.

One

This

attempts

is

to

not universally true. The

tic,"

treat

of expression of a

social

phenomena
which became so in-

"scientistically,"
fluential in the 19th century, were not
completely absent in the 18th. There
is

at least a strong

element of

it

in the

work of Montesquieu, and of the PhysiBut the great achievements of
the century in the theory of the social
sciences, the works of Cantillon and
ocrats.

Hume, of Turgot and Adam Smith,
were on the whole free from it.

the former as the "habit and

mode

man

of science," the
latter as "characteristic of, or having
the attributes of, a scientist (used depreciatively)." The terms "naturalistic"
and "mechanistic," which have often
been used in a similar sense, are less
appropriate because they tend to suggest the wrong kind of contrast.
7. See e.g. J. Fiolle, Scientisme et

and A. Lalande,
Vocabulaire technique et critique de la
philosophic, 4th ed., vol. II, p. 740.

Science, Paris, 1936,

2. The earliest example of the modern narrow use of the term "science"
given in Murray's New English Dictionary dates from as late as 1867. But
T. Merz (History of European Thought
in the Nineteenth Century, vol. I, 1896,

selves suffer from the same attitude
which has given their influence on

p.

89) is probably right when he suggests that "science" has acquired its

other disciplines such a baneful character: "It is difficult to conceive of

present meaning about the time of the
formation of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science (1831).
3. E.g. J. Dalton's New System of

anything more scientifically bigoted
than to postulate that all possible experience conforms to the same type
as that with which we are already fa-

Chemical Philosophy, 1808; Lamarck's
Philosophic Zoologique, 1809, or Fourcroy's Philosophic chimique, 1806,
4. We shall use the term Science
with a capital letter when we wish to
emphasize that we use it in the modern

miliar,

narrow meaning.
See M. R. Cohen, "The Myth
about
Bacon and the Inductive
5.

Method," Scientific Monthly, vol.
XXIII, 1926, p. 505.
6. Murray's New English Dictionary
knows both "scientism" and "scientis-

8. Perhaps the following passage by
a distinguished physicist may help to
show how much the scientists them-

and therefore to demand that
explanation use only elements familiar
in everyday experience. Such an attitude bespeaks an unimaginativeness,
a mental obtuseness and obstinacy,

which might be expected to have exhausted their pragmatic justification at
a lower plane of mental activity."
(P. W. Bridgman, The Logic of Modern Physics, 1928, p. 46.)
9. On the significance of this "law of
inertia" in the scientific sphere and its
effects on the social disciplines see H.

207

208

(NOTES TO PAGES 17-22)

Miinsterberg, Grundzuge der Psychologic, 1909, vol. I, p. 137; E. Bernheim,
Lehrbuch der historischen Methode
und Geschichts-philosophie, 5th ed.,
1908, p. 144, and L. v. Mises, Nationalokonomie, 1940, p. 24. The phenomenon that we tend to overstrain a new
principle of explanation is, perhaps,
more familiar with respect to particular
scientific doctrines than with respect to
Science as such. Gravitation and evolution, relativity

and psycho-analysis,

all

have for certain periods been strained
far beyond their capacity. That for Science as a whole the phenomenon has
lasted even longer and had still more
far-reaching effects is not surprising in
the light of this experience.

This view was, I believe, first exformulated by the German
physicist G. Kirchhoff in his Vorlesungen fiber die mathematische Physik;
10.

plicitly

Mechanik, 1874, p. 1, and later made
widely known through the philosophy
of Ernst Mach.
11. The word "explain" is only one
of many important instances where the
natural sciences were forced to use concepts originally formed to describe human phenomena. "Law" and "cause,"
"function" and "order," "organism"
and "organization" are others of similar
importance where Science has more or
less succeeded in freeing them from
their anthropomorphic connotations,
while in other instances, particularly,
as we shall see, in the case of "pur-

pose," though it cannot entirely dispense with them, it has not yet succeeded in doing so and is therefore
with some justification afraid of using

14. The comparison becomes more
adequate if we conceive that only small
groups of characters, say words, appear to us simultaneously, while the
groups as such appear to us only in a
definite time sequence, as the words

(or phrases) actually do when we read.
15. The old puzzle over the miracle
that qualities which are supposed to attach to the things are transmitted to
the brain in the form of indistinguishable nervous processes differing only
in the organ which they affect, and then
in the brain re-translated into the original qualities, ceases to exist.
have
no evidence for the assumption that the
things in the external world in their relations to each other differ or are similar in the way our senses suggest to
us. In fact we have in many instances
evidence to the contrary.

We

16. It

may

just

this classification is

be mentioned that
probably based on

a pre-conscious learning of those relationships in the external world which
are of special relevance for the existence of the human organism in the
kind of environment in which

it

devel-

oped, and that it is closely connected
with the infinite number of "conditioned reflexes" which the human species had to acquire in the course of its
evolution. The classification of the
stimuli in our central nervous system
is probably highly "pragmatic" in the
sense that it is not based on all observable relations between the external
things, but stresses those relations between the external world (in the nar-

rower sense) and our body which in
the course of evolution have proved

Nunn, Anthropo-

significant for the survival of the species. The human brain will e.g. classify

morphism and Physics (Proceedings of
the British Academy, vol. XTII), 1926.

external stimuli largely by their association with stimuli emanating from the

13. L. S. Stebbing, Thinking to Some
Purpose ("Pelican" Books), 1939, p.

reflex action of parts of the

these terms.
12. Cf. T. Percy

107. Cf. also B. Russell, The Scientific
Outlook, 1931, p. 85.

human

body caused by the same external
stimulus without the intervention of the
brain.

(NOTES TO PAGES 22-3 1 )
17.

That

different people classify ex-

tween "teleological" and "normative"

"same" way does

sciences. (See particularly the illuminating discussions of the problem in
K. Englis, Teleologische Theorie der
Wirtschaft, Brunn, 1930.) But the
term remains nevertheless misleading.
If a name is needed the term "praxeological" sciences, deriving from A. Espinas, adopted by T. Kotarbinsky and
E. Slutsky, and now clearly defined and
extensively used by L. v. Mises (Na-

ternal stimuli in the

not

mean

are

the

that individual sense qualities
same for different people

(which would be a meaningless statement) but that the systems of sense
qualities of different people have a

common structure

(are

homeomorphic

systems of relations).
18. Most of the problems of this latter group will, however, raise problems
of the kind characteristic of the social

when we attempt

sciences proper
explain them.
19.

209

to

Sometimes the German term

Geisteswissenschaften is now used in
English to describe the social sciences
in the specific narrow sense with which
we are here concerned. But considering
that this German term was introduced
by the translator of J. S. Mill's Logic
to render the latter's "moral sciences,"
there seems to be little case for using
this translation instead of the original
English term.
20. It has often been suggested that
for this reason economics and the other
theoretical sciences of society should
be described as "teleological" sciences.
This term is, however, misleading as it
is apt to suggest that not only the actions of individual men but also the

which they produce
are deliberately designed by somebody

social structures

for a purpose.

It

leads thus either to

an "explanation" of social phenomena
in terms of ends fixed by some superior
power or to the opposite and no less
fatal mistake of regarding all social
phenomena as the product of conscious

human

design, to a "pragmatic" interpretation which is a bar to all real
understanding of these phenomena.

Some authors, particularly O. Spann,
have used the term "teleological" to
justify the most abstruse metaphysical
speculations. Others, like K. Englis,
have used it in an unobjectionable
manner and sharply distinguished be-

tionalokonomie, Geneva, 1940) would
appear to be the most appropriate.
21. While the great majority of the
objects or events which determine hu-

man

action, and which from that angle
have to be defined not by their physical
characteristics but by the human attitudes towards them, are means for an
end, this does not mean that the pur-

posive or "teleological" nature of their
definition is the essential point. The
human purposes for which different
things serve are the most important but
still only one kind of human attitudes
which will form the basis of such classification.
ghost or a bad or good
omen belong no less to the class of
events determining human action which

A

have no physical counterpart, although
they cannot possibly be regarded as

human action.
22. I believe also in the discussions

instruments of

on psychological methods.
23. It

is

sheer illusion

when some

sociologists believe that they can make
"crime" an objective fact by defining
it as those acts for which a person is
punished. This only pushes the subjective element a step further back, but
does not eliminate it. "Punishment" is
still a subjective thing which cannot be
defined in objective terms. If, e.g., we
see that every time a person commits
a certain act he is made to wear a
chain round his neck, this does not tell
us whether it is a reward or a punish-

ment.
24. This

is

a development which has

(NOTES TO PAGES 31-34)

210

probably been carried out most consistently by L. v. Mises and I believe
that most peculiarities of his views

University
Writings,
Press 1949, p. 166).

which

whose writings were unknown

readers as
strange and unacceptable are due to
the fact that in the consistent development of the subjectivist approach he
has for a long time moved ahead of his
contemporaries. Probably all the characteristic features of his theories, from
his theory of money (so much ahead of
the time in 1912!) to what he calls his
at first strike

many

a priorism, his views about mathematical economics in general and the measurement of economic phenomena in
particular, and his criticism of planning
all follow directly (although, perhaps,
not all with the same necessity) from
this central position. See particularly
his Grundprobleme der Nationaloko-

nomie (Jena, 1933) and

Human

Ac-

tion, 1949.

25. This

was seen very

clearly

by

some of the

early economists, but later
obscured by the attempts to make economics "objective" in the sense of the

natural sciences. Ferdinando Galiani,

Delia Moneta (1751) emphasized that "those things are equal
which afford equal satisfaction to the
one with respect to whom they are said
to be equivalent. Anyone who seeks
equality elsewhere, following other
e.g., in his

principles, and expects to find it in
weight, or similarity of appearance,
will show little understanding of the
sheet of paper
facts of human life.
is often the equivalent of money, from

A

it differs both in weight and
appearance; on the other hand, two
moneys of equal weight and quality,
and similar appearance, are often not

which

from A. E. MonEarly Economic Thought, 1930,

equal." (Translation
roe,
p.

303)
26. Except probably linguistics, for

which

indeed be claimed with
that it "is of strategic
importance for the methodology of the
it

may

some justification

sciences"

social

when

I

wrote

(E.

Selected
California

Sapir,

of

Edward

this essay, stresses

Sapir,
to me

many

of the points here emphasized. See, for
instance, ibid. p. 46: "no entity in human experience can be adequately defined as the mechanical sum or product
of its physical properties," and "all significant entities in experience are thus
revised from the physically given by
passing through the filter of the functionally or relatedly meaningful."
27. In the extreme Ricardian form
the statement is, of course, that a
change in the value of the product will
affect only the value of the land and
leave the value of the co-operating
labor altogether unaffected. In this
form (connected with Ricardo's "objective" theory of value) the proposition can be regarded as a limiting case
of the more general proposition stated
in the text.

28. For some further discussion of
these problems see the author's article

"Economics and Knowledge," Economica, February, 1937, and reprinted
in Individualism and Economic Order,
Chicago, 1948.
29. Cf. C. V. Langlois and C. Seignobos, Introduction to the Study of
History, trans, by G. G. Berry, London
1898, p. 218: "Actions and words all
have this characteristic, that each was
the action or word of an individual;
the imagination can only represent to
itself individual acts, copies from those
which are brought before us by direct

observation.

of

men

As

these are the actions

living in society,

most of them

are performed simultaneously by several individuals, or are directed to some
common end. These are collective acts;
but in the imagination as in direct observation, they always reduce to a sum
of individual actions. The "social fact,"
as recognized by certain sociologists, is

(NOTES TO PAGES 34-39)
a philosophical construction, not a

211

his-

the stutf of our thinking. In the social
sciences it is the elements of the com-

30. Cf. the excellent discussions of
the effects of conceptual realism (Begriffsrealismus) on economics in W.
Eucken, The Foundations of Economics, London, 1950, pp. 51 el seq.
3 1 In some contexts concepts which
by another social science are treated
as mere theories to be revised and improved upon may have to be treated as
data. One could, e.g., conceive of a

are known to
of dispute.
In the natural sciences they can be at
best surmised." Cf. also C. Menger,

torical fact."

.

"science of politics" showing what kind
of political action follows from the
people holding certain views on the
nature of society and for which these
views would have to be treated as data.
But while in man's actions towards social

phenomena,

i.e.,

political actions,

we

in explaining his
have to take his

views about the constitution of society
as given, we can on a different level
of analysis investigate their truth or untruth. The fact that a particular society
believe that its institutions have
been created by divine intervention we
would have to accept as a fact in ex-

may

plaining the politics of that society; but
it need not prevent us from showing
that this view

is

probably

false.

An

Essay on the
Nature and Significance of Economic
32. Cf. Robbins,

2nd ed., 1935, p. 105: "In
Economics ... the ultimate constituents of our fundamental generalizations are known to us by immediate
Science,

acquaintance. In the natural sciences
they are known only inferentially."
Perhaps the following quotation from
an earlier essay of my own (Collectivist

Economic Planning, 1935,

p. 11) may
help further to explain the statement
in the text: "The position of man, midway between natural and social phenomena of the one of which he is an
effect and of the other a cause
brings
it about that the essential basic facts
which we need for the explanation are
part of common experience, part of

plex
us

phenomena which

beyond the

possibility

V ntersuchungen

uber die Methoden

der Socialwissenschaften, 1883, p. 157,
note:
"Die letzten Elemente, auf
welche die exacte theoretische Interpretation der Naturphanomene zuriickgehen muss, sind 'Atome' und 'Krafte*.
Beide sind unempirischer Natur. Wir
vermogen uns 'Atome' uberhaupt nicht,
und die Naturkrafte nur unter einem
Biide vorzusstellen, und verstehen wir
in Wahrheit unter den letzteren lediglich

uns unbekannten Ursachen
Bewegungen. Hieraus ergeben

die

realer

sich fur die exacte Interpretation der
in letzter Linie ganz
ausserordentliche Schwierigkeiten. Anders in den exacten Socialwissenschaften. Hier sind die menschlichen Individuen und ihre Bestrebungen, die
letzten Elemente unserer Analyse, empirischer Natur und die exacten theoretischen Socialwissenschaften somit in
grossem Vortheil gegeniiber den exacten Naturwissenschaften, Die 'Grenzen des Naturerkennens' und die
hieraus fiir das theoretische Verstandnis der Naturphanomene sich ergebenden Schwierigkeiten bestehen in
Wahrheit nicht fur die exacte Forschung auf dem Gebiete der Socialer-

Naturphanomene

scheinungen.

Wenn

A.

Comte

die

'Gesellschaften' als reale Organismen,

und zwar

als

Organismen komplicir-

terer Art, denn die natiirlichen, auffasst
und ihre theoretische Interpretation als

das unvergleichlich kompliciertere und
schwierigere wissenschaftliche Problem
bezeichnet, so findet er sich somit in
einem schweren Irrthume. Seine Theorie ware nur gegeniiber Socialforschern
richtig, welche den, mit Riicksicht auf
den heutigen Zustand der theoretischen

Naturwissenschaften, geradezu wahn-

(NOTES TO PAGES 39-43)

212

witzigen

Gedanken fassen

wiirden, die

Gesellschaftsphanomene nicht in specifisch socialwissenschaftlich, sondern
in

naturwissenschaftlich-atomistischer

Weise interpretiren zu wollen."
33. I have borrowed the term compositive from a manuscript note of
Carl Menger who in his personal annotated copy of Schmoller's review of
his Methoden der Socialwissenschaften

(Jahrbuch fur Gesetzgebung, etc.,
N.F., 7, 1883, p. 42) wrote it above
the word deductive used by Schmoller.
Since writing this I have noticed that
Ernst Cassierer in his Philosophic der

Aufkldrung (1932, pp. 12, 25, 341)
uses the term "compositive" in order
to point out rightly that the procedure
of the natural sciences presupposes the
successive use of the "resolutive" and
the "compositive" technique. This is
useful and links up with the point that,
since the elements are directly known
to us in the social sciences, we can
start here with the compositive procedure.
34. As Robbins (I.e., p. 86) rightly
says, economists in particular regard
"the things which psychology studies as

the data of their

own

deductions."
absorbs a great
part of the economist's energies should
not deceive us about the fact that by itself this "pure logic of choice" (or "eco35.

That

this task

nomic calculus") does not explain any
facts, or at least does no more so by
itself than does mathematics. For the
precise relationship between the pure
theory of the economic calculus and
its use in the explanation of social phe-

nomena

I must once more refer to my
"Economics and Knowledge"
It
(Economica, February,
1937).
should perhaps be added that while
economic theory might be very useful
to the director of a completely planned
system in helping him to see what he
ought to do to achieve his ends, it
would not help us to explain his actions
article

except in so far as he was actually
guided by it.
36. Cf. M. R. Cohen, Reason and
Nature, p. 356: "If, then, social phenomena depend upon more factors than
we can readily manipulate, even the
doctrine of universal determinism will
not guarantee an attainable expression
of laws governing the specific phenomena of social life. Social phenomena,
though determined, might not to a
finite mind in limited time display any
laws at all."
37. Pareto himself has clearly seen
this. After stating the nature of the
factors determining the prices in his
system of equations, he adds (Manuel
d' economic politique,
pp. 233-4) : "It may be

2nd

ed.,

1927,

mentioned here
that this determination has by no means
the purpose of arriving at a numerical
calculation of prices. Let us make the
most favorable assumptions for such
a calculation; let us assume that we
have triumphed over all the difficulties
of finding the data of the problem and
that

we know

the ophelimites of

all

the

commodities for each individual, and all the conditions of production of all the commodities, etc. This is
already an absurd hypothesis to make.
Yet it is not sufficient to make the solution of the problem possible. We have
seen that in the case of 100 persons and
700 commodities there will be 70,699
different

conditions (actually a great number of
circumstances which we have so far
neglected will still increase that number) ; we shall, therefore, have to solve
a system of 70,699 equations. This exceeds practically the power of algebraic
analysis, and this is even more true if
one contemplates the fabulous number
of equations which one obtains for a
population of forty millions and several
thousand commodities. In this case the

would be changed: it would not
be mathematics which would assist
political economy, but political econroles

(NOTES TO PAGES 43-50)

omy which would

assist

mathematics.

In other words, if one really could
know all these equations, the only
means to solve them which is available
to human powers is to observe the practical solution given by the market."
also A. Cournot, Researches
Mathematical Principles of the
Theory of Wealth (1838), trans, by
N. T. Bacon, New York, 1927, p. 127,
where he says that if in our equations
we took the entire economic system

Compare
into the

into consideration "this

would surpass

the powers of mathematical analysis
and of our practical methods of calculation, even if the values of all the constants could be assigned to them numerically."
38. Cf. above pp. 20 et seq.
39. The attempts often made

to

evade this difficulty by an illustrative
enumeration of some of the physical
attributes by which we recognize the
object as belonging to one of these
mental categories are just begging the
question. To say that when we speak
about a man being angry we mean that
he shows certain physical symptoms
helps us very little unless we can exhaustively enumerate all the symptoms
by which we ever recognize, and which

always when they are present mean,
that the

man who shows them is

Only

we could do

if

this

angry.

would

it

be

legitimate to say that in using this term
we mean no more than certain physical

phenomena.
40. This must also serve as a justification for what may have seemed the
very loose way in which we have
throughout, in illustrative enumerations

of mental

entities,

indiscrimi-

nately lumped together such concepts
as "sensation," "perceptions," "concepts," or "ideas." These different types
of mental entities all have in common
that they are classifications of possible
external stimuli (or complexes of such
stimuli). This contention will perhaps

213

appear less strange now than would
have been the case fifty years ago,
since in the configurations or Gestalt
qualities we have become familiar with
something which is intermediate between the old "elementary" sense qualities and concepts. It may be added that
on this view there would, however,
seem to be no justification for the unwarranted
conclusions
ontological
which many members of the Gestalt
school draw from their interesting observations; there is no reason to assume
that the "wholes" which we perceive
are properties of the external world
and not merely ways in which our mind
classifies complexes of stimuli; like
other abstractions, the relations between the parts thus singled out may
be significant or not.
Perhaps it should also be mentioned
here that there is no reason to regard
values as the only purely mental categories which do therefore not appear
in our picture of the physical world.
Although values must necessarily occupy a central place wherever we are
concerned with purposive action, they
are certainly not the only kind of

mental categories which we
have to employ in interpreting

purely
shall

human

activities:

the distinction be-

tween true and false provides at least
one other instance of such purely mental categories which is of great importance in this connection. On the connected point that it is not necessarily
value considerations which will guide
us in selecting the aspects of social life
which we study, see note 62 below.
41. Which, as

we have already seen,
mean that it will

does, of course, not

always treat only elements which have
properties as members of the

common
same

class.

42. Cf. p. 42 above.
43. Cf the comment
.

Menger

in the passage

32 above.

on

this by Carl
quoted in note

214

(NOTES TO PAGES 51-59)

44. Cf. above p. 23.
45. It should, perhaps, be emphasized that there is no necessary connection between the use of mathematics in
the social sciences and the attempts to

try" acting or behaving in a certain
manner, but always and exclusively to

measure

lektiva," Zeitschrift fur Nationaloko-

social

phenomena

as partic-

who

are acquainted only
with elementary mathematics are apt
and in
to believe. Mathematics may

ularly people

economics probably

is
absolutely indispensable to describe certain types of

structural
complex
relationships,
though there may be no chance of ever
knowing the numerical values of the

concrete

magnitudes
(misleadingly
which appear in the

called "constants")

formulae describing these structures.
46. M. R. Cohen, Reason and Nature, p. 305.

47. Cf.

L.

Hogben

(in

Lancelot

Hogben's Dangerous Thoughts, 1939,
99): "Plenty is the excess of free
energy over the collective calory debt
of human effort applied to securing the
needs which all human beings share."
48. The description of this contrast
as one between the view from the inside and the view from the outside,
though, of course, metaphorical, is less
misleading than such metaphors usu-

p.

ally are

and perhaps the best short way

to indicate the nature of the contrast. It

brings out that

what of social complexes

directly known to us are onlv the
parts and that the whole is never directis

think of individuals as acting.
50. Cf. above p. 38.
51. Cf. F. Kaufmann, "Soziale Kol-

nomie, Vol. I, 1930.
52. It should be noted

though

Ginsberg, The Psychology of Society,
1921, chapter IV. What is said in the
text does of course not preclude the
possibility that our study of the way in

which individual minds interact may
reveal to us a structure which operates

some respects similarly to the individual mind. And it might be possible
that the term collective mind would
prove the best term available to describe such structures
though it is
most unlikely that the advantages of
the use of this term would ever out-

in

weigh its disadvantages. But even if
this were the case the employment of
this term should not mislead us into
thinking that it describes any observable object that can be directly studied.
54. Cours de philosophic positive,

IV (2nd-4th

ly perceived but always reconstructed
by an effort of our imagination.

Vol.

49. It would, of course, be false to
believe that the first instinct of the
student of social phenomena is any less

Irrtum, 3rd ed.,

to "go and see." It is not ignorance of
the obvious but long experience which
has taught him that directlv to look for
the wholes which popular language
suggests to exist leads nowhere. It has,
indeed, rightlv become one of the first
maxims which the student of social
phenomena learns (or oucht to learn)
never to speak of "society" or a "coun-

that,

observation may assist us to understand what people mean by the terms
they use, it can never tell us what a
"market" or "capital," etc., really are,
i.e., which are the significant relations
that it is useful to single out and combine into a model.
53. On this whole problem, see M.

55. Cf. Ernst

ed.), p. 258.

Mach, Erkenntnis und

1917, p. 28, where,
however, he points out correctly that
"Konnten wir die Menschen aus grosserer Entfernung, aus der Vogelperspektive, vom Monde aus beobachten,
so wiirden die feineren Einzelheiten
mit den von individuellen Erlebnissen
herruhrpnden ETnfliissen fur uns verschwinden, und wir wiirden nichts
wahrnehmen, als Menschen, die mit
grosser Refcelmassigkeit wachsen, sich
nahren, sich fortpflanzen."

(NOTES TO PAGES 64-70)
56. G. Meinecke, Die Entstehung
des Historismus, 1936. The term historicism applied to the older historical
school discussed by Meinecke is inap-

propriate and misleading since it was
introduced by Carl Menger (see Un-

tersuchungen uber die Methoden der
Sozialwissenschaften, 1883 pp. 216-220
with reference to Gervinus and
Roscher and Die Irrthumer des Historismus, 1884) to describe the distinguishing features of the younger historical school in economics represented

by Schmoller and his associates. Nothing shows more clearly the difference
between this younger historical school
and the earlier movement from which
it inherited the name than that it was
Schmoller who accused Menger of being an adherent of the "Burke-Savigny
school" and not the other way round.
(Cf. G. Schmoller, "Zur Methodologie
der Staats-und Socialwissenschaften,"
Jahrbuch fur Gesetzgebung, etc., N.F.,
Vol. VII, 1886, p. 250).
57. Although in its German origins
the connection of historicism with positivism is perhaps less conspicuous than
is the case with its English followers
such as Ingram or Ashley, it was no less

present and is overlooked only because
historicism is erroneously connected
with the historical method of the older
historians, instead of with the views of

Roscher, Hildebrandt and particularly
Schmoller and his circle.
58. It will be noted that this, still restricted, use of the term "science" (in
the sense in which the Germans speak
of Gesetzeswissenschaft) is wider than
the even narrower sense in which its
meaning is confined to the theoretical
sciences of nature.
59. Cf. e.g., E. F. M. Durbin, "Methods of Research
Plea for Co-operation in the Social Sciences," Economic
Journal, June, 1938, p. 191, where the
writer argues that in the social sciences
""unlike the natural sciences, our sub-

A

215

divisions are largely (though not entirely) abstractions from reality rather
than sections of reality" and asserts of

the natural sciences that "in all these
cases the object of study are real independent objects and groups. They are
not aspects of something complex.

How

are real things."
this can be
really asserted, e.g., of Crystallography

They

(one of Mr. Durbin's examples) is difficomprehend. This argument
has been extremely popular with the

cult to

the German historical
school in economics, though, it should
be added, Mr. Durbin is probably en-

members of

unaware how closely his whole
attitude resembles that of the Kathe-

tirely

dersozialisten of that school.
60. For a good survey of the modern
theories of historical relativism see M.

Mandelbaum, The Problem of
cal

Knowledge,

New York,

Histori1938.

61. Cf. note 64 below.
62. It is not possible to pursue
further here the interesting question
of the reasons which make the historian ask particular questions and
which make him ask at different times
different questions about the same period.

We

ought,

briefly to refer to

however, perhaps
one view which has

exercised wide influence, since

it

claims

application not only to history but to
all Kulturwissenschaften. It is Rickert's
contention that the social sciences, to

which, according to him, the historical
method is alone appropriate, select
their object exclusively with reference
to certain values with respect to which
they are important. Unless by "value
consideration" (Wertbezogenheit) any
kind of practical interest in a problem
is meant so that this concept would
include the reasons which make us,
say, study the geology of Cumberland,
this is certainly not necessarily the case.
If, merely to indulge my taste in detective work, I try to find out why in the
year x Mr. N. has been elected mayor

216

(NOTES TO PAGES 70-82)

is no less historical
work though no known value may have

of Cambridge, this

been affected by the fact that Mr. N.
rather than somebody else has been
elected. It is not the reason why we are
interested hi a problem but the character of the problem which makes it
a historical problem.
63. It does not alter the essential fact

mate sense

pothesis." In this sense the unconfirmed
explanation of a particular event is
often called a historical theory, but

such a theory

is of course something
altogether different from the theories
which pretend to state laws which his-

that the theorizing will usually already
have been done for the historian by his
source which in reporting the "facts"
will use such terms as "state" or "town"

torical

which cannot be defined by physical
characteristics but which refer to a
complex of relationships which, made

J.

explicit, is

64.

a "theory" of the subject.

The confusion which

reigns in

has evidently been assisted by
a purely verbal confusion apt to arise
in German in which most of the discussions of this problem have been conducted. In German the singular or
unique is called the Individuelle, which
almost inevitably calls forth a misleading association with the term for the
this field

individual (Individuum). Now, individual is the term which we employ to
describe those natural units which in
the physical world our senses enable us
to single out from the environment as

connected wholes. Individuals in this
sense, whether human individuals or
animals or plants, or stones, mountains
or stars, are constant collections of
sense attributes which, either because
the whole complex can move together
in space relatively to its environment,
or for cognate reasons, our senses spontaneously single out as connected
wholes. But this is precisely what the
objects of history are not. Though sin-

gular (individuell) as the individual
they are not definite individuals in
the sense in which this term is applied
to natural objects. They are not given
to us as wholes but only found to be
wholes.
65. There is, of course, also a legiti,

is,

which we may speak of

in

"historical theories," where "theory"
is used as a synonym for "factual hy-

developments obey.

66. L. Brunschvicg, in Philosophy
and History, Essays presented to E.

by R. Klibansky and H.
Paxton, Oxford, 1936, p. 30.
67. Cf. C. V. Langlois and C. Seignobos, Introduction to the Study of
History, trans, by G. G. Berry, London, 1898, p. 222: "If former humanity
did not resemble humanity of to-day,
documents would be unintelligible."
68. Cf. W. Eucken, Grundlagen der
Nationalokonomie, 1940, pp. 203-205.
Cassirer, ed.

69. "Man is what is known to all."
Cf. H. Diehls, Die Fragmente der Vor-

sokratiker, 4th ed., Berlin, 1922;

De-

mocritus, Fragment No. 165, Vol. II,
p. 94. 1 owe the reference to Democritus in this connection to Professor

Alexander Rustow.
70. On this concept of the "pragmatic" interpretation of social insti-

whole of this seccompare Carl Monger, Untersuchungen uber die Methode der So-

tutions as for the

tion

zialwissenschaften, 1883 (L. S. E. reprint 1933), book II, chapter 2, which
is still the most comprehensive and
most careful survey known to me of

the problems here discussed.
71. See

above note

11.

M.

Schlick, Fragen der
Ethik, Vienna, 1930, p. 72.
73. On the use of teleological con-

72. Cf.

cepts in biology compare the careful
discussion in J. H. Woodger, Biological
Principles, 1929, particularly the section on "Teleology and Causation," pp.
429-451; also the earlier discussion in

the same

work

(p.

291) on the so-

(NOTES TO PAGES 82-88 )
called "scientific habit of thought"
causing the "scandal" of biologists not
taking organization seriously and "in
their haste to become physicists, neglecting their business."
74. Untersuchungen,

"Hier

ist

es

wo

etc.,

p.

163:

uns das merkwiirdige,

vielleicht das merkwiirdigste Problem
der Sozialwissenschaften entgegentritt:

Wieso

vermogen dem Gemeinwohl

dienende und fiir dessen Entwicklung
hochst bedeutsame Institutionen ohne
einen auf ihre Begriindung gerichteten
Gemeinwillen zu entstehen?" If for the

ambiguous and somewhat questionbegging term "social welfare" we substitute

in this statement "institutions

which are necessary conditions for the
achievement of man's conscious purposes" it is hardly saying too much that
the way in which such "purposive
wholes" are formed and preserved is
the specific problem of social theory,
just as the existence and persistence of
organisms is the problem of biology.
75.

How much

intellectual progress

has been obstructed here by political
passions is readily seen when we compare the discussion of the problem in
the

economic and

sciences

political

with, say, the study of language where,
what in the former is still disputed, is

a commonplace which nobody dreams
of questioning.
76.

Menger speaks

in this

connec-

217

contemporary schoolmen have intellectualized it into a purposive and selfregulating instrument of general welfare."

From

this

it is

of course only a

few steps to the demand "that order
and direction should be imposed upon
an unruly society."
77. A typical example of the treatment of social institutions as if they
were true artifacts, in a characteristic
scientistic setting, is provided by J.
Mayer, Social Science Principles in the
Light of Scientific Method, Durham,
N. C., 1941, p. 20, where society is
explicitly "designated as an 'artificial
creation,' much as an automobile or
steel mill is, that is to say, made by the
artifice of man."
78.

The

best illustration, perhaps,
constantly make use of the
experience or knowledge acquired by
others, is the way in which, by learning to speak, we learn to classify things
in a certain manner without acquiring
the actual experiences which have led
successive generations to evolve this
system of classification. There is a great
deal of knowledge which we never consciously know implicit in the knowledge
of which we are aware, knowledge
which yet constantly serves us in our
actions, though we can hardly be said

of

how we

to "possess" it.
79. See above pp. 64-79.
80. Ibid., pp. 54-58. Cf. also Part

I,

tion rightly of "a pragmatism which,
against the wishes of its representatives, leads inevitably to socialism."

289, and Menger, Untersuchungen t
etc., pp. 165 et seq.
81. A. N. Whitehead, An Introduc-

(Untersuchungen, etc., p. 208.) Today
view is most frequently found in

tion to Mathematics (Home University
Library), 1911, p. 61.
82. It cannot be objected to this that
what is meant by conscious control is
not control by a single mind but by a
concerted and "co-ordinated" effort of
all, or all the best minds, instead of by
their fortuitous interplay. This phrase
about the deliberate co-ordination
merely shifts the task of the individual
mind to another stage but leaves the

this

the writings of the American "Institutionalists" of which the
following
(taken from Professor W. H. Hamilton's article on "Institution" in the
Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences,
Vol. VIII, pp. 87-89) is a good example:

"The tangled thing

called capital-

ism was never created by design or cut
to a blueprint; but

now

that

it is

here,

p.

218

(NOTES TO PAGES 88-94)

ultimate responsibility still with the coordinating mind. Committees and other
devices for facilitating communications
are excellent means to assist the individual in learning as much as possible;
but they do not extend the capacity of

knowledge as those discussed

in the

text.

90.

Some

further aspects of the big
just touched upon are

problems here
discussed

1944,

in

my Road

particularly

to

chapters

Serfdom,
VI and

the individual mind. The knowledge
that can be consciously co-ordinated
in this manner is still limited to what
the individual mind can effectively absorb and digest. As every person with
experience of committee work knows,
its fertility is limited to what the best
mind among the members can master;
if the results of the discussion are not
ultimately turned into a coherent
whole by an individual mind, they
are likely to be inferior to what would

XIV.

have been produced unaided by a
single mind.
83. L. T. Hobhouse, Democracy

For those who wish to pursue
further the matters discussed in the last
section a few references to several
relevant works may be added which
have appeared since this was first published. In addition to the Selected Writ-

and Reaction, 1904, p. 108.
84. J. Needham, Integrative

Levels.

A

Revaluation of the Idea of Progress
(Herbert Spencer Lecture), Oxford,
1937, p. 47.

K. Mannheim, Man and Society
an Age of Reconstruction, 1940,

85.
in

p. 213.

86. See

above pp. 76-80.

87. Interesting

illustrations

of the

length to which these absurdities have
been carried will be found in E. Gruenwald, Das Problem der Soziologie des
Wissens, Vienna, 1934, a posthumously
published sketch of a very young
scholar which still constitutes the most
comprehensive survey of the literature
of the subject.
88. Cf. above p. 78.
89. It is, perhaps, not so obvious as
to make it unnecessary to mention it,
that the fashionable disparagement of
any activity which, in science or the
arts, is carried on "for its own sake,'*
and the demand for a "conscious social

purpose" in everything, is an expression
of the same general tendencv and based
on the same illusion of complete

91. It is characteristic of the spirit
of the time, and of positivism in particular, when A. Comte speaks (Systeme de Politique Positive, Vol. I, p.
356) of "La super iorite necessaire de
la morale demontree sur la morale
rev61ee," characteristic especially in its
implied assumption that a rationally

constructed moral system is the only
alternative to one revealed by a higher
being.
92.

Edward Sapir (ed. by D. G.
Mandelbaum, University of California
ings of

Press, 1949, especially pp. 46 f, 104,
162, 166, 546 ff and 553) already mentioned earlier, the reader will with ad-

vantage consult G. Ryle, "Knowing
How and Knowing That," Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society, N. S. XLVI,
1945, and the corresponding passages
in the same author's The Concept of
Mind, London, 1949, K. R. Popper,
The Open Society and its Enemies,
London, 1946, and M. Polany, The
Logic of Liberty, London, 1951.
93.

Once again one of the

lustrations of this tendency

is

best

il-

provided

by K. Mannheim, Man and Society in
an Age of Reconstruction, 1940, particularly pp. 240-244, where he explains
that "functionalism

made

its first apof the natural sciences, and could be described as the
technical point of view. It has only
recently been transferred to the social

pearance

sphere

.

.

in the field

.

Once this technical approach

(NOTES TO PAGES 94-96 )

219

was transferred from natural sciences
to human affairs, it was bound to bring

korperliche Verwirklichung, geeignet
sind" (quoted by Franz Schnabel,

about a profound change hi man himself
The functional approach no
longer regards ideas and moral stand-

Deutsche Geschichte im neunzehnten
Jahrbundert, vol. HI, 1934, p. 222 a
work which is a mine of information

ards as absolute values, but as products
of the social process which can, if necessary, be changed by scientific guidance combined with political practice
.
.
The extension of the doctrine of
technical supremacy which I have advocated in this book is in my opinion
inevitable . . Progress in the technique
of organization is nothing but the application of technical conceptions to
human
the forms of co-operation.
being, regarded as part of the social
machine, is to a certain extent stabilized in his reactions by training and

on

.

.

.

.

.

A

education, and all his recently acquired
activities are co-ordinated according to
a definite principle of efficiency within

an organized framework."
94. The best description of this feature of the engineering approach by an
engineer which I have been able to find
occurs in a speech of the great Ger-

man optical engineer Ernst Abbe: "Wie
der Architekt ein Bauwerk, bevor eine
Hand zur Ausfiihrung sich riihrt, schon
im Geist vollendet hat, nur unter
Beihilfe von Zeichenstift und Feder zur
Fixierung seiner Idee, so muss auch das
komplizierte Gebilde von Glas und
Metal sich aufbauen lassen rein verstandesmassig, in alien Elementen bis

vorausbestimmt, in rein geisdurch theoretische Ermittlung der Wirkung aller Teile, bevor
ins letzte

tiger Arbeit,

diese Teile

noch korperlich

ausgefiihrt

Der arbeitenden Hand darf dabei
keine andere Funktion mehr verbleiben
sind.
als

die

genaue

Verwirklichung

der

Rechnungen bestimmten
Formen und Abmessungen aller Konstruktionselemente, und der praktischen Erfahrung keine andere Aufgabe
als die Beherrschung der Methoden
und Hilfsmittel, die fiir letzteres, die
durch

die

this as

on

all

other matters of the
Germany in the

intellectual history of

nineteenth century).
95. It would take too long here to
explain in any detail why, whatever
delegation or division of labor is possi-

an engineering 'bluevery limited and differs in
essential respects from the division of
ble in preparing

print,'

it is

knowledge on which the impersonal
social processes rest. It must suffice to
point out that not only must the precise

nature of the result be fixed which anyone who has to draw up part of an engineering plan must achieve, but also
that, in order to make such delegation
possible, it must be known that the
result can be achieved at no more than
a certain maximum cost.
96. The most persistent advocate of
such i/i natura calculation is, significantly, Dr. Otto Neurath, the protagonist of modern "physicalism" and
"objectivism."
97. Cf. the characteristic passage in
B. Bavinck, The Anatomy of Modern

German

Science (trans, from the 4th
edition

564:

by H.

S.

"When our

1932, p.

Hatfield),

technology

is

still

work on

the problem of transforming heat into work in a manner better
than that possible with our present-day
steam and other heat engines
, this
is not directly done to cheapen producat

.

.

.

first of all because
an end in itself to increase the
thermal efficiency of a heat engine as
much as possible. If the problem set
is to transform heat into work, then
this must be done in such a way that

tion of energy, but
it

is

the greatest possible fraction of the
The ideal
heat is so transformed
of the designer of such machines is
therefore the efficiency of the Carnot
.

.

.

220

(NOTES TO PAGES 96-99)

cycle, the ideal process which delivers
the greatest theoretical efficiency."
It is easy to see why this approach,
together with the desire to achieve a
calculation in natura, leads engineers
so frequently to the construction of
systems of "energetics" that it has been
said, with much justice, that "das Charakteristikum der Weltanschauung des

Ingenieurs

schauung"

ist

die energetische WeltanBrinkmann, Der In-

(L.

We

genieur, Frankfurt, 1908, p. 16).
have already referred (above p. 41) to

manifestation of sciand there is no
space here to return to it in greater detail. But it deserves to be recorded how
this characteristic

entistic "objectivism,"

widespread and typical

this

view

is

and

how great the influence it has exercised.
E. Solvay, G. Ratzenhofer, W. Ostwaldt, P. Geddes, F. Soddy, H. G.
Wells, the "Technocrats" and L. Hogben are only a few of the influential
authors in whose works "energetics"

play a more or

less prominent role.
There are several studies of this movement in French and German (Nyssens,
L'tnergetique, Brussels, 1908; G. Bar-

Principes de politique positive
baste sur I'tnergetique sociale de Sol-

nich,

1918; Schnehen, EnWeltanschauung, 1907; A.
Dochmann, F. W. Ostwald's Energetik,
Bern, 1908; and the best, Max Weber,
vay,

Brussels,

ergetische

"Energetische Kulturtheorien," 1909,
reprinted in Gesammelte Aufsdtze zur
Wissenschaftslehre, 1922), but none
of them adequate and none, to my

knowledge, in English.

The section from the work of Bavinck from which a passage has been
quoted above condenses the gist of
the enormous literature, mostly German, on the "philosophy of technology" which has had a wide circulation
and of which the best known is E.
Zschimmer, Philosophie der Technik,
3rd ed., Stuttgart, 1933. (Similar ideas
pervade the well-known American

works of Lewis Mumford.) This German literature is very instructive as a
psychological study, though otherwise
about the dreariest mixture of preand revolting nonsense which it has ever been the ill
fortune of the present author to peruse.
tentious platitudes

Its

common

wards

all

feature is the enmity toeconomic considerations, the

attempted vindication of purely technological ideals, and the glorification
of the organization of the whole of society on the principle on which a single
factory is run. (On the last point see
particularly F. Dessauer, Philosophie
der Technik, Bonn, 1927, p. 129.)
98. That this is fully recognized by
its advocates is shown by the popularity
among all socialists from Saint-Simon
to Marx and Lenin, of the phrase that
the whole of society should be run hi
precisely the same manner as a single
factory
Lenin,

is

now

The

being run. Cf. V. I.
and Revolution

State

(1917), "Little Lenin Library," 1933,
"The whole of society will have
become a single office and a single factory with equality of work and equality
of pay"; and for Saint-Simon and
Marx, p. 121 above and note 72 to
Part II.
p. 78.

99. Cf. now
essay on 'The

on these problems my
Use of Knowledge in
Society," American Economic Review,
XXXV, No. 4 (September, 1945), reprinted in Individualism and Economic
Order, Chicago, 1948, pp. 77-91.
100. It is important to remember in
this connection that the statistical aggregates which it is often suggested the
central authority could rely upon in its
decisions, are always arrived at by a
deliberate disregard of the peculiar circumstances of time and place.
101. Cf. in this connection the suggestive discussion of the problem in
K. F. Mayer, Goldwanderungen, Jena,
1935, pp. 66-68, and also the present
author's

article

"Economics

and

(NOTES TO PAGES 99-107)
Knowledge"

in

Economica, February,

1937, reprinted in Individualism and
Economic Order, Chicago, 1948, pp.
33-56.
102. The Scientific Outlook, 1931,
p. 211.
103. Ibid., p. 211. The passage

quoted could be interpreted

in

an un-

objectionable sense if "certain purposes" is taken to mean not particular
predetermined results but as capacity
to provide what the individuals at any

time wish i.e., if what is planned is a
machinery which can serve many ends
and need not in turn be "consciously"
directed towards a particular end.
104. A. Bebel, Die Frau und der
Sozialismus,

Part

13th ed.,

1892, p. 376.

tions with purely speculative subjects

should be excluded from a healthy state
as profitless pursuits." Yet he did not
include in this the moral sciences and
even, with his master Locke, regarded
them as a priori sciences comparable

with mathematics and of equal certainty with it. See on all this G. Misch,
"Zur Entstehung des franzosischen
Positivismus," Archiv
1,

"Der Sozialismus ist die mit klarem
Bewusstsein and mit voller Erkenntnis
auf alle Gebiete menschlicher Taetigkeit angewandte Wissenschaft." Cf.
also E. Ferri, Socialism and Positive
Science (trans, from the Italian edition of 1894). The first clearly to see
this connection seems to have been
M. Ferraz, Socialisme, Naturalisme et
Positivisme, Paris, 1877.
105. M. R. Cohen, Reason

and Na-

ture, 1931, p. 449. It is significant that

one of the leading members of the
movement with which we are concerned, the German philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach, explicitly chose the opposite principle, homo homini Deus,
as his guiding maxim.

Two

1. D'Alembert was fully aware of
the significance of the tendency he was
supporting and anticipated later positivism to the extent of expressly condemning everything that did not aim
at the development of positive truths
and even suggesting that "all occupa-

Abt.

221

Archiv

fiir

fiir

Philosophic,
der

Geschichte

Philosophic, vol. 14 (1901), especially
and 158; M. Schinz,
pp. 7, 31
Geschichte der franzosischen Philosophic seit der Revolution, I. Bd. Die

Anfange des franzosischen
us, Strassburg,

Positivis-

1914, pp. 58, 67-69,

71,

96,

149;

and H. Gouhier, La
Comte et la forma-

jeunesse d'Auguste

du positivisme, Vol. II, Paris, 1936,
Introduction.
2. Cf. E. Mach, Die Mechanik in

tion

ihrer Entwicklung,

3rd

ed.,

1897, p.

449.
3. In his famous work Du culte des
dieux fetishes (1760).
4. (Euvres de Turgot, ed. Daire,
Paris, 1844, Vol. II, p. 656. Compare
also ibid., p. 601.
5. See particularly the detailed analysis by Misch and the books by Schinz
and Gouhier quoted in note 1 above,
and also M. Uta, La theorie du savoir
dans la philosophic d'Auguste Comte,
Paris (Alcan), 1928.
6. To avoid giving a wrong impression it should perhaps also be stressed
at this point that the Liberalism of the
French Revolution was of course not
yet based on the understanding of the

market mechanism provided by

Adam

222

(NOTES TO PAGES 107-109)

Smith and the Utilitarians but rather
on the Law of Nature and the rational-

and Economic Order, University of

istic-pragmatic interpretation of social
phenomena which is essentially preSmithian and of which Rousseau's so-

7. See his Esquisse d'un tableau historique des progres de V esprit humain
(1793), ed. O. H. Prior, Paris, 1933,

cial

contract

is

the

prototype.

One

might indeed trace much of the contrast, which with Saint-Simon and
Comte became an open opposition to
classical economics, back to the differences which existed, say, between
Montesquieu and Hume, Quesnay and
Smith, or Condorcet and Bentham.
Those French economists who like

Chicago Press, 1948.

p. 11.
8. Cf.

Tableau general de

his

la

science qui a pour objet I' application
du calcul aux sciences politiques et

morales,

(Euvres,

1847-49, Vol.

I,

ed.

Arago, Paris,

pp. 539-573.

Condillac or

Arago, Vol. I, p. 392.
Condorcet, Rapport et projet de
decret sur I' organization generate de
V instruction publique (1792), ed. G.

tially

Compayre,

J. B. Say followed essenthe same trend as Smith never
had an influence on French political
thought comparable to that of Smith in
England. The result of this was that the
transition from the older rationalist
views of society, which regarded it as
a conscious creation of man, to the

newer view which wanted to re-create
it on scientific principles, took place in
France without passing through a stage
in which the working of the spontaneous forces of society was generally
understood.

The

revolutionary cult of
Reason was symptomatic of the general
acceptance of the pragmatic conception
of social institutions the very opposite
of the view of Smith. And in a sense it
would be as true to say that it was the
same veneration of Reason as the universal creator which led to the triumphs
of science that led to the new attitude
to social problems as it is to say that
was the influence of the new habits
of thought created by the triumphs of
it

science and technology. If socialism is
not a direct child of the French Revolution, it springs at least from that rationalism which distinguished most of the
French political thinkers of the period

from the contemporary English liberalism of Hume and Smith and (to a lesser
degree) Bentham and the philosophical
Radicals.

essay in

On all this
my volume

see

now

the

first

on Individualism

9. (Euvres, ed.

10.

Paris, 1883, p. 120.
11. Esquisse, ed. Prior, p. 11.
12. Ibid., p. 200.

13. Ibid., p. 203. The famous passage in which this sentence occurs figures, characteristically, as motto of
book VI, "On the Logic of the Moral
Sciences" of J. S. Mill's Logic.
1 4. It is worthy of mention that the
man who was so largely responsible for
the creation of what in the late 19th

century

came

torical

sense,"

to be regarded as "hisof the Entwicki.e.,

lungsgedanke with
associations,

all its

metaphysical

was the same man who

was capable of celebrating

in a discourse the deliberate destruction of
papers relating to the history of the
noble families of France. "To-day

Reason bums the innumerable volumes
which attest the vanity of a caste. Other
vestiges remain in public and private
libraries. They must be involved in a

common

destruction."

Quoted by Gouhier, La jeunesse
d'Auguste Comte, Vol. II, p. 31, from
the Dtcade philosophique, Vol. I,
1

5.

1794.

See E. Allain, L'ceuvre scolaire
Revolution, 1789-1802, Paris,
f
1891; C. Hippeau, L instruction publique en France pendant la Revolution,
Paris, 1883 and F. Pic?wet. Les Ideo16.

de

la

logues, Paris, 1891, pp. 56-61.

(NOTES TO PAGES 110-112)
17.

See E. Allain, op.

cit.

pp. 117-

120.
18.

After 1803 the ancient languages

were

223

and protector of Saint-Simon himself.
As Arago reports of Lazare Carnot, he
"always discoursed with [Arago] on the

Napo-

political organisation of society precisely as he speaks in his work of a

Me moire sur
de Vhomme (1813) in
(Euvres de Saint-Simon and d'Enfantin,
Paris, 1877-78, Vol. XL, p. 16.

machine." See F. Arago, Biographies
of Distinguished Men, transl. by W. H.
Smith, etc., London, 1857, pp. 300-

at least partly restored in
leon's lycees.
19.

la

H. de Saint-Simon,

science

20. Particularly of saltpetre for the

production of gunpowder.
21. See Pressard, Histoire de

I'asso-

and
Gouhier, La jeunesse d'Auguste Comte,

304, and E. Diihring, Kritische Geschichte der allgemeinen Principien der
Mechanik, 3rd ed., Leipzig, 1887, pp.

258-261.
24. L. de Launay,

ciation philotechnique, Paris 1889,

Vol.

II, p.

54.

On

the foundation and history
of the Ecole Polytechnique see A.
Fourcy, Histoire de I'Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, 1828; G. Pinet, Histoire
22.

de I'Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, 1887;
G.-G. J. Jacobi, Ueber die Pariser
polytechnische Schule (Vortrag gehalten am 22. Mai 1835 in der physikalisch-okonomischen Gesellschaft zu
Konigsberg) in Gesammelte Werke,

fais,

Un grand

Monge, Fondateur de

franI'Ecole

Polytechnique, Paris, 1933, p. 130.
25. Cf. A. Comte, "Philosophical
considerations on the Sciences and Men
of Science" (1825, in Early Essays on
Social Philosophy, London, "New Universal Library," p. 272), where he says
that he knows "but one conception

capable of giving a precise idea of [the
characteristic doctrines fitted to constitute the special existence of the class
of Engineers], that of the illustrious

1891, Vol. VI, p. 355; F.
Schnabel, Die A hftinge des technischen
Hochschulwesens, Stuttgart, 1925; and
F. Klein, Vorlesungen iiber die Entwicklung der Mathematik, Berlin 1926,
Vol. I, pp. 63-89.

Monge, in his Geometric descriptive,
where he gives a general theory of the

23. Carnot had published in 1783
an Essay on Machines in General (in

had arrived

Berlin,

the second edition of 1803 called Prin-

fondamentaux de I'equilibre du
mouvement) in which he not only expounded Lagrange's new view of mecipes

chanics but developed the idea of the
machine" which takes nothing
away from the force which puts it into
motion. His work did much to prepare
the way for that of his son, Sadi Carnot, "the founder of the Science of

arts of construction."

26. G.-G.

J. Jacobi, I.e., p. 370.
27. Fourcroy, Vauquelin, Chaptal.
28. In March 1808, shortly after he

in Paris (nominally on a
diplomatic mission), Alexander von
Humboldt wrote to a friend: "Je passe
ma vie a 1'Ecole Polytechnique et aux
Tuileries. Je travaille a 1'Ecole, j'y
couche; j'y mis tous les nuit, tous les
matins. J'habite la meme chambre avec

"ideal

Gay-Lussac." (K. Bruhns, Alexander
von Humboldt, 1872, Vol. II, p. 6.
29. Laplace, Essai philosophique sur
les probability (1814), edition Les
Maitres de la Pensee Scientifique, Paris,

Energy." His younger son, Hippolyte,
was the leading member of the SaintSimonian group and actual writer of
the Doctrine de Saint-Simon which we
shall meet later. Lazare Carnot, the
father, had been a life-long admirer

1921, p.

3.

30. Cf. for instance the reference to
in Abel Transon, De la religion SaintSimonienne. Aux Eleves de VEcole
Polytechnique, Paris, 1830, p. 27. Sec
also note 69 below.
it

(NOTES TO PAGES

224

1

12-1 14)

31. See O. Neurath, Empirische SoVienna, 1931, p. 129. On the

ziologie,

postulate

of

universal

determinism

which is really involved, see particularly K. Popper, Logik der Forschung,
1935, p. 183, Ph. Frank,

Das Kausal-

gesetz, and R. von Mises, Probability,
Statistics and Truth, 1939, pp. 284-294.

Equally characteristic of the positivist

spirit

and no

less

influential

in

spreading it is the famous anecdote
about Laplace's answer to Napoleon
when asked why in his Mecanique
Celeste the name of God did not appear: "Je n'ai pas besoin de cette hypothese."
32. E. Duhring, Kritische Geshichte,
etc., 3rd ed., p. 569, et seq.
33. H. de Balzac after remarking in
one of his novels (Autre etude de
femme) how different periods had enriched the French language by certain

characteristic words, takes organiser as
an example and adds that it is "un mot

de rempire qui contient Napol6on tout
entier."

Keller, Le general de la Moriquoted by Pinet, Histoire de

34.

fi.

ciere,

I'Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, 1887, p.
136.
35.
hier,

Vol.

A. Thibaudet, quoted by GouLa jeunesse d'Auguste Comte,

I,

p. 146.

Arago, (Euvres, Vol. HI,
and F. Bastiat, Baccalaureat

p.
et

Socialisme, Paris, 1850.
37. See G. Pinet, Ecrivains et Penseurs Polytechniciens, Paris, 1898.
38. See, however, the essays of Lavoisier and Lagrange in Daire, M6-

langes d* economic politique,

2

vols.,

Paris, 1847-8, Vol. I, pp. 575-607.
39. See Arago, (Euvres, Vol. II, p.
34, where he points out that Ampfcre

(a physiologist by training) was one of
the few connecting links between the

two groups.
40.

On Cuvier's influence see the ac-

count in

J.

T. Merz,

tury,

weights, measures and calculation, by
comparison of all substances employed
and all substances obtained; this to-day
is

the only legitimate

A

History of Euro-

way

of reasoning

and demonstration. Thus, though the
natural sciences escape the application
of the calculus, they glory in being subject to the mathematical spirit, and by
the wise course they have invariably
adopted, they do not expose themselves
to the risk of taking a backward step."

Cf also Lord Acton, Lectures on Modern History, pp. 22 and 338, note 82.
41. A. C. Thibaudeau (Bonaparte
and the Consulate, 1834, English translation by G. K. Fortescue, 1908, p.
153) points out that, although the
terms 'ideologues' and 'ideologic,' commonly ascribed to Napoleon, were introduced as technical terms by Destutt
de Tracy with the first volume of his
.

Elements

known

published

in

'ideologic'
as early as 1684.

was

tfldeologie,

1801, at least the

word

French
the whole ideological school
see the comprehensive exposition in F.
Picavet, Les Ideologues, Essai sur I'his42.

36. See

109,

in the Nineteenth CenVol. I, 1906, pp. 136 et seq.,
where the following characteristic passage is quoted (p. 154) from Cuvier's
Rapport historique sur le progres des
sciences naturelles depuis 1789, Paris,
1810, p. 389: "Experiments alone, experiments that are precise, made with

pean Thought

in

On

toire des idees et des theories scientireligieuses, en
France depuis 1789, Paris, 1891, and,

fiques, philosophiques,

published since this essay first appeared, E. Cailliet, La Tradition litteraire des ideologues, Philadelphia,
1943.
43. The expression was indeed used
in very much the same wide sense as
their German contemporaries used the
term anthropology. On the German
parallel to the ideologues see F. Gunther,

Die Wissenschaft vom Menschen,

(NOTES TO PAGES 114-117)
ein Beitrag zum deutschen Geistesleben
im Zeitalter des Rationalismus (in

Geschichtliche Untersuchungen, herausgegeben von K. Lamprecht, Bd. 5,
Heft 1) 1907.
44. Picavet, I.e., p. 337.
45. Ibid., p. 314.
46. Ibid., p. 250. Also see pp. 131-5,
where Cabanis' predecessor in these efforts,

Volney,

is

discussed. In

1793,

Volney had published a Catechisme
du Citoyen Frangais, later to become
La lot naturelle ou les principes physiques de la morale in which he unsuccessfully attempted to create morals as
a physical science.

47. Ibid., p. 226.
48. On Destutt de

knowledge of law, whether
ministrative,

political

When

is

a

man

civil,

225
ad-

or

military?
called upon to reor-

ganize a state, he must follow principles that are forever in conflict. The
advantages and disadvantages of the
different systems of legislation have to
be sought in history." See also H.
Taine, Les origines de la France contemporaine, 1876, Vol. II, pp. 214-233.
Not because of its historical correctness which may be questioned, but in
order to show how all this appeared
to the next generation, the following
characteristic statement by a leading
Saint-Simonian may be quoted: "Apres
1793, VAcademic des Sciences prend le

Tracy see H.

sceptre; les mathtmaticiens et physi-

Michel, L'ldee d'etat, Paris, 1895, pp.
282-286; on Louis Say see A. Schatz,
L'lndividualisme economique et social,
Paris, 1907, pp. 153 et seq.
49. See Picavet, I.e., p. 82.
50. See the passage from Napoleon's
reply to the Council of State at its session of December 20th, 1812, quoted
by Pareto (Min4 and Society, Vol. Ill,
p. 1244) from the Moniteur universel,
Paris, December 21st, 1812: "All the
misfortunes that our beautiful France
has been experiencing have to be
ascribed to 'ideology,' to that cloudy

dens remplacent les litterateurs:
Monge, Fourcroy, Laplace
r&gnent
dans le royaume de ^intelligence. En

metaphysics which goes ingeniously
seekjng first causes and would ground
legislation of the peoples upon them
instead of adapting laws to what we
know of the human heart and the lessons of history. Such errors could only
lead to a r6gime of men of blood and
have in fact done so. Who cajoled the
people by thrusting upon it a sovereignty it was unable to exercise? Who
destroyed the sacredness of the laws
and respect for the laws by basing
them not on the sacred principles of
justice, on the nature of things and the
nature of civil justice, but simply on
the will of an assembly made up of
individuals who are strangers to any

.

meme

.

.

membre de
de mlcanique, 6touffe
au berceau les enfants legitimes de la
philosophic du XVIIP stecle." (P. Enfantin, Colonisation de VAlgerie, 1843,
temps, Napoleon,

Tlnstitut, classe

pp. 521-2.)
51. See A. C. Thibaudeau, Le Consulat et I'Empire, Paris, 1835-37, Vol.
Ill, p.

396.

$

52. See J. B. Say, fraite
economic
politique, 2nd ed. 1814, Avertissement.
53. See G. Chinard, Jefferson et les
ideologues, Baltimore, 1925.
54. Cf. Merz, I.e., Vol. I. p. 149.
55. The date, and therefore the age,

not quite certain.
56. See H. Gouhier, La jeunesse
d'Auguste Comte et la formation du
positivisme, Vol. II, Saint Simon ]usis

qu'a la restauration, Paris, 1936, which
for the first forty-five years of SaintSimon's life supersedes all earlier biographies, including the best of them, G.

Un precurseur du socialisme,
Saint-Simon et son ceuvre, Paris, 1894,

Weill,

and M. Leroy, La vie veritable du
comte de Saint-Simon, 1760-1825,
Paris, 1925, and G. Dumas, Psycho-

(NOTES TO PAGES

226

1

17-121 )

logie de deux messies positivistes,
Saint-Simon et Auguste Comte, Paris,

1905.
57. "J'ai employe mon argent a acquerir de la science; grande chere, bon
vin,
vis

beaucoup d'empressements

vis-a-

ma
professeurs auxquels
bourse e*tait ouverte, me procuraient
toutes les facilites que je pouvais desirer." Quoted by M. Leroy, /.c., p. 210.
58. Leon Halevy, "Souvenirs de
des

Saint-Simon," La France litttraire,
March, 1832, partially reproduced by

G. Brunet

in

Revue

d'histoire

econom-

ique et sociale, 1925, p. 168.
59. See

Madame

de

Stael,

De

la

literature consideree dans ses rapports
avec les institutions sociales (1800).

The passages quoted occur

in the "Discours preliminaire," Vol. I, p. 58, and
in Vol. II, 2nd part, Ch. VI, p. 215 of
the 3rd ed. of 1818.
60. See (Euvres de Saint-Simon et

d'Enfantin, Paris, 1865-1878 (henceforth quoted as
Vol. XV,
O.S.S.E.),
pp. 7-60, and the new edition reprinted
from the original with an Introduction

by A.

Pereire, Paris, 1925. Nearly all

important passages from SaintSimon's
works
are
conveniently
brought together in L'ceuvre d'Henri
de Saint-Simon, Textes choisies avec
une Introduction par C. Bougie, Notice
bibliographique de A. Pereire, Paris,
1925. In the references given below, the
first refers to the (Euvres, the second
(in brackets) to the separate edition of
the Lettres of 1925. For the complicated history of the various editions
and manuscripts of this work see Gouthe

La

jeunesse d'Auguste Comte,
Vol. II, pp. 224 et seq.
61. O.S.S.E., XV, p. 11 (3).
62. Ibid., p. 51 (55).
63. Ibid., p. 49 (53).
64. Ibid., p. 48 (52).
65. Ibid., pp. 50-3 (54-8).
66. In Lettres, ed. A. Pereire, pp.
hier,

xv, 93.

67. O.S.S.E., XV, p. 39 (39).
68. Ibid., p. 40 (40).
69. O.S.S.E., XV, pp. 39-40, 55 (39,
61). The passage in which Saint-Simon
praises the significance of that uni-

versal law is a curious anticipation of
Laplace's famous world formula (ibid.,
p. 59 [67]) : "Faites la supposition que

vous avez acquis connoissance de la
maniere dont la matiere s'est trouvee

une epoque quelconque, et
que vous avez fait le plan de I'Univers,
en designant par des nombres la quanrepartie a

de matiere qui se trouvoit contenue
dans chacune des ces parties, il sera
clair a vos yeux qu'en faisant sur ce
pkn d'application de la loi de la pesanteur universelle, vous pourriez predire
(aussi exactment que I'&at des connoissances mathematiques vous le permettit6

troit)

tousles

changements successifs

qui arriveraient dans I'Univers." But
although Laplace published his formula
only in 1814, we must, no doubt, assume that the idea would have been
familiar from his lectures delivered in
1796 to which he later added the introduction containing the famous phrase.
70. O.S.S.E., XV, p. 26 (23).
71. Ibid., p. 28 (25).
72. Ibid., p. 55 (61). Cf. also p. 57

(65) "L'obligation est imposed a chacun de donner constamment a ses
forces personelles une direction utile
I'humanit6; les bras du pauvre con:

tinueront a nourir le riche, mais le
riche recoit le commandement de faire
travailler sa cervelle, et si sa cervelle
n'est pas propre au travail, il sera bien
oblige de faire travailler ses bras; car
Newton ne laissera surement pas sur
cette planete (une des plus voisines du
soleil) des ouvriers volontairement inutiles dans 1'atelier." The idea of the

organization of society on the example
of the workshop, which appears here
for the first time in literature, has, of
course, since played an important r61e
in all socialist literature.

See particu-

227

(NOTES TO PAGES 121-126)
G. Sorel, "Le syndicalisme r6volutionaire" in Mouvement Socialist e, November 1st and 15th, 1905. Compare

larly

also the passage in

K. Marx, Das Kapi-

tal, Vol. I, Ch. 12, section 4, 10th ed.,
pp. 319-324.
73. Lett res, ed. A. Pereire, p. 54.

The passage has been
pressed by his pupils
(Euvres.

discreetly sup-

who

edited the

74. O.S.S.E., XV, p. 54 (59).
75. 2 Vols. 1807-8. The Introduc-

has not been included in the
(Euvres de Saint-Simon et d'Enfantin
and must be consulted in (Euvres choisies de C.-H. de Saint-Simon, Bruxelles,
tion

1859, Vol.

I,

pp. 43-264.

76. (Euvres choisies, I

("Mon Porte-

"Trouver une synthese scientifique qui codifie les dogmes du nouune
veau pouvoir et serve de base
reorganisation de 1'Europe."
77. (Euvres choisies, I, p. 219. See
also pp. 195, 214-5, and 223-4.
78. Ibid., p. 214: "Je crois a la ne*cessite d'une religion pour le maintien de
1'ordre social; je crois que le deisme est
use, je crois que le physicisme n'est
point assez solidement etabli pour pouvoir servir de base a une religion. Je
crois que la force des choses veut qu'il
y ait deux doctrines distinctes: le
Physicisme pour les gens instruits, et le
D6isme pour la classe ignorante."
79. Saint-Simon uses "Deism" and
"Theism" indiscriminately for Monofeuille")

:

Tidee de Dieu

pas autre chose que 1'idee de Fin-

telligence
88. See

humaine

generalisee."

W. Sombart,

Sozialismus

und

Soziale Bewegung, 7th ed., 1919,
p. 54.
89. O.S.S.E., XV, pp. 42, 53-56.
90. O.S.S.E., XL, p. 39.
91. Ibid., p. 17.
92. Ibid., pp. 25, 186.
93. Ibid., p. 29.
94. Ibid., pp.161, 186.
95. Ibid., p. 17.
96. Ibid., pp. 247, 310.

97. Ibid., p. 265.
98. Ibid., p. 172.
99. Ibid.,p. 161.
100. O.S.S.E., XL, p. 287.
101. De la reorganisation

de la soeuropeenne ou de la ndcessite
et des moyens de rassembler les peuples
de reurope en un seul corps politique
en conservant d. chacun son independance nationale, par H. C. Saint-Simon
et A. Thierry, son 61eve, O.S.S.E., Vol.

ciete

new

edition

by A. Pereire, Paris, 1925.
102. For a discussion of the

signif-

XV,

pp. 153-248, also in a

icance of the

work of

Thierry, Mignet,
and Guizot in this connection see G.

Plechanow, "Ueber die Anfange der
Lehre vom Klassenkampf," Die Neue
C. Seigno-

La Mfthode historique 2 m * ed.
1909, p. 261: Vest lui [Saint-Simon]

Descartes

now become

the hero because our
perpetual time-server has become violently nationalistic, deplores the English predominance which is still defiling
French science and wants to give the

French. The work pretends to be an answer to Napoleon's

initiative to the

XV, pp. 71,77.
XV, p. 112.

87. Ibid., p. 217:
n'est

bos.

82. Ibid., p. 61.

has

85. O.S.S.E.,
86. O.S.S.E.,

Zeit, Vol. 21, 1902. Cf. also

theism.
80. Ibid., p. 195.
81. Ibid., p. 146.
83. Ibid., pp. 243-4.
84. Ibid., pp. 231, 236.

question to the Academic on the progress of French sciences since 1789.

t

qui a fourni a Augustin Thierry ses
id6es fondamentales."
103. O.S.S.E., XV, p. 247. In the
form of "L'age d'or, qu'une aveugle tradition a plac6 jusq'ici dans le
pass6, est devant nous" the phrase appears first in 1825 as the motto of
Saint-Simon's Opinions litteraires et
philosophiques, and later as the motto
of the Saint-Simonian Producteur.

228

(NOTES TO PAGES 126-131)

104. See M. Leroy, Vie de SaintSimon, pp. 262, 277, and Hippolyte

Carnot, "Memoire sur le Saint-Simonism/' Stances et travaux de IAcademic
des Sciences Morales et Politiques, 47*
ann6e, 1887, p. 128, where H. Carnot
reports the following characterisation
of Saint-Simon by his father: "J'ai
connu M. de Saint-Simon; c'est un
singulier homme. II a tort de se croire
un savant, mais personne n'a des ides
aussi neuves et aussi hardies." The
only other scholars who seem ever
to have given Saint-Simon any encouragement appear to have been the
astronomer Hall6 and, characteristically, Cuvier.

VIndustrie

ou discussions pomorales et philosophiques dans
I'interet de tous les hommes livres a
des travaux independants. In O.S.S.E.,
Vol. XVIII.
106. For a comparison of SaintSimon's views of this period with those
of his liberal contemporaries see E.
Halevy, Uere des tyrannies, 1938, pp.
105.

litiques,

33-41.
107. O.S.S.E., Vol. XVIII, p. 165.
108. Ibid., pp. 186, 188, 189. Cf. also
Vol. XIX, p. 126.
109. See A. Augustin Thierry, Auf

gustin Thierry (1795-1856) d apres sa
correspondance et ses papiers de fa-

A. Comte, Early Essays on

Social Philosophy, translated by H. D.
Hutton, "New Universal Library," Lon-

don (1911),

23; and Systeme de
politique positive, 1851-54, Vol. HI,
p.

p. 16.

111. See H. Gouhier, La jeunesse
d'Auguste Comte, Vol. I, 1933, ch. 6.

As the third volume of this excellent
work had not yet appeared at the time
this essay

was

written, the following

exposition relies for Comte's biography
after 1817 largely on the same author's
brief

1931.

Vie

d'Auguste

[O.S.S.E.],

XIX, pp.

37-8.

114. Ibid., p. 27: "La grande sup6riorit6 de 1'epoque actuelle . . . consiste

en ce qu'il nous est possible de savoir
ce que nous faisons;
Ayant la
conscience de notre etat, nous avons
celle de ce qu'il nous convient & fa ire."
.

.

.

115. Ibid., p. 23.
m * cahier:
16. L'lndustrie,Vol. III,2
"II ne s'agit plus de disserter a perte de
1

vue pour savoir quel est le meilleur des
gouvernements: il n'y a rien de bon,
il n'y a rien de mauvais, absolument
parlant.

Tout

est relatif, voil& la seule

chose absolue."
117. O.S.S.E., XIX, p. 13.
118. Ibid., pp. 82-3, 89.
119. Ibid., p. 83.
120. Incidentally, and as a justification of this view, Comte develops for
the first time the theory that the present

constitution of property in France derives from the conquest of Gaul by the

Franks. His statement

(ibid.,

p.

87)

that the successors of the victors are

the proprietors while the descendants of the vanquished are today the
farmers provides the basic idea for the
still

racial theories of history of Thierry and
is on this that Saint-Simon

his school. It

mille, Paris, 1922, p. 36.

110. See

112. A. Pereire, Autour de SaintSimon, Paris, 1912, p. 25.
113. GEuvres de Saint-Simon
et
ed.
(2nd
d'Enfantin
1865-78)

Comte,

Paris,

two years
ority

XXI,

later

vis-d-vis
p.

based his claim of priGuizot (see O.S.S.E.,

192).

121. A. Pereire, I.e., pp. 25-28.
122. Lettres d'Auguste Comte d

M.

Valat, Paris, 1870, pp. 51, 53. See also
pp. 36-7; (letter dated April 17, 1818):
"Je puis te dire que jamais je n'ai connu

de jeune

homme

ge"ne*reux

que

aussi ardent ni aussi

lui: c'est

un

etre original

sous tous les rapports.
cette liaison

de

J'ai appris, par
travail et d'amiti6 avec

un des hommes qui voient

le plus loin

en politique philosophique, j'ai appris
une foule de choses que j'aurais en vain

(NOTES TO PAGES 131-136)
cherchees dans les livres, et mon esprit
a fait plus de chemin depuis six mois
que dure notre liaison qu'il n'en aurait
fait entrois ans si j'avais ete seul. Ainsi
cette

besogne m'a forme

plus juste, plus eleve." M. Leroy, in
quoting this passage (la vie veritable
du comte Henri de Saint-Simon, 1925,
p. 293), inserts after the first sentence
"Saint-Simon
un accoucheur
est
d'idees." Although this sentence is
probably not by Comte, we have taken
the title of section II from it.

A. Pereire, I.e., p. 60.
124. The term journal and similar
expressions in connection with SaintSimon's works must not be taken too
literally. They all appeared in irregular
sequence, often out of numerical order
and in different formats and in various
editions. This is true of the Organisateur even more than of his other
123.

works.
125. O.S.S.E., XX, pp.
126. Ibid., pp. 50-58.

17-26.

XX, pp. 50-58.
idea of the chambre d'in-

127. Ibid.,

128.

The

vention is probably borrowed
con's New Atlantis.

from Ba-

129. O.S.S.E., XX, p. 59.
130. Ibid., p. 63.
131. 1 bid., pp. 69-72.
132. I bid., p. 14.
133. Ibid.,p.67.

134. In the

brackets to those of the O.S.S.E refer
to this English edition.
135. O.S.S.E.,XX,pp. 118-9 (56-7).
136. lbid.,p.S5 (35).
137. Ibid., pp. 137-9(68-71).
138. Ibid., p. 106(49).

le

jugement
sur les sciences politiques, et, par
contre-coup, elle a agrandi mes idees
sur toutes les autres sciences, de sorte
que je me trouve avoir acquis plus de
philosophic dans la tete, un coup d'oeil

Appendix to the Systeme

de politique positive, 1854, later reprinted under the title Opuscules de
philosophic sociale 1819-1828, Paris,
1883. An English translation of the
latter by H. D. Hutton with an introduction by F. Harrison is available in
Routledge's "New Universal Library"
under the title Early Essays on Social
Philosophy. The references added in

229

139. Ibid., p. 142 (72); for Comte's
considerations on the same subject a
few years later see also (272-4). The
fear that his proposals might one day
lead to a "despotism founded on sci-

ence,"

Comte

describes as "a ridiculous

and absurd chimera which could only
arise in minds entirely foreign to positive ideas." Ibid., p.

158 (82).

140. Ibid., p. 161 (85).
141. Ibid., p. 150 (77).
142. Ibid., pp. 144-5 (73):

"Lepeu-

ple n'a plus besoin d'etre gouvern6,
c'est-a-dire

command6.

II

suffit,

pour

maintien de 1'ordre, que les affaires
d'un interet commun soient adminisle

trees."

143. Ibid., XX, p. 193. Cf. also
the passage in Saint-Simon's later Organisation sociale, ibid., Vol. XXXIX,
p. 136, and Comte's remarks on the
same subject in his contribution to the
Catechisme des Industriels in Early
Essays, p. 172.
144. Ibid., XX, p. 194.

145. Ibid., pp. 194-5.
146. Ibid., XX, pp. 199-200.
147. /ta/., pp. 218, 226.
148. Ibid., p. 220.
149. Ibid., pp. 236-7.
150. Ibid., pp. 240-242.
151. Ibid., Vols. XXI, XXII.
152. Ibid., Vol. XXI, p. 16. The
phrasing of these passages is so clearly
Comtian that there can be little doubt

that they were written by Comte.
industriel
153. Sy steme
(original

edition) pp. xiii-xiv.
154. O.S.S.E., XXI, p. 83. See also
XXII, p. 179.
155. Ibid.,

XXI,

p.

14;

XXII,

p.

184.

156.

Des Bourbons

et des Stuarts

(NOTES TO PAGES 136-139)

230
p. 447.
157.

1 72. Leaving it open as to how much
of this "Saint-Simonian" doctrine may
not be due to Comte's earlier contribu-

p. 258,

tions.

(1825) in (Euvres Choisies, Vol.

II,

O.5.5..,XXU,p.248.Seealso
and XXI, pp. 14 and 80, and
XXXVII, p. 179, where his disgust with
the lack of organization in England

173. Early Essays, pp. 96, 98.
174. Ibid., p. 97. This has now of

finds expression in the characteristic
outburst that "Cent volumes in-folio,

course become orthodox Marxist doc-

du

(in

ne suffiraient
pas pour rendre compte de toutes les
caractere le plus

fin,

inconsequences organiques qui existent

en Angleterre."
158. O.S.S.E., XXII, p. 188.
159. Ibid., p. 148.

160. Ibid.,
161. Ibid.,

XXI,

163. Ibid.,
164. Ibid.,
165. Ibid.,
166. Ibid.,
167. Ibid.,

See also

XXI,

p.

been

14:

"Those who are really convinced that
they have advanced science, would demand not freedom for the new views
to continue side by side with the old,

175. Early Essays, pp. 130, 136, 107.
176. Ibid., pp. 200-1.
177. Ibid., pp. 131-2.

181. Early Essays, pp. 191, 180.
182. Ibid., p. 165. Compare for a

originally

lui (le travailleur)

Comte's

(see

non seulement

Umwalzung der Wissen-

1894, p. 302) runs
original: "An die Stelle der
Regierung iiber Personen tritt die Ver-

schaft,
in the

done?"
p.

XXII, pp. 80, 185.

d'administrer des choses, mais de gouverner des hommes, ceuvre difficile,
immense, oeuvre saint" (Globe, April
4th, 1831). Engel's use of the expression in the Anti-Duhring (Herrn Eugen
Diihring's

to be

178. Ibid., pp. 147-9, 157.
179. Ibid., pp. 144, 133.
180. Ibid., pp. 144, 149.

above, p. 133) and was later taken
over by the Saint-Simonians (see particularly Exposition, ed. Bougie and
Halevy, p. 162), in whose publications
it occurs once in the form "H s'agit

pour

is

Library),

XXI, p. 47.
XXI, p. 161.
XXI, p. 107.

XXXVII, p. 87. See also
151. The formula seems to

have

"What

Lenin

by the new ones."

XXXVII-XXXIX.
82.

Lenin,

Little

but the substitution of the old views

p. 20.

162. Ibid., XXII, p.
XXI, pp. 131-2.

trine. Cf.

3rd ed.,

waltung von Sachen. Der Staat wird
nicht 'abgeschafft,' er stirbt ab."
168. O.S.S.E., XXXVII, p. 8.
169. Ibid., XXII, pp. 257-8.
170. Later included under the original title in the Early Essays on Social
Philosophy, pp. 88-217.
171. Early Essays, Author's Preface,
p. 24.

use of the same terms by Engels in his
exposition of the materialist interpretation of history his Herrn Eugen Dii-

Umwalzung der Wissenschaft
(English ed., Herrn Eugen Diihring's
Revolution in Science, p. 300, trans, by
E. Burns, where he says that the means
by which the existing abuses can be got
rid of "are not to be invented by the
mind, but discovered by means of the
mind in the existing factors of produchring's

tion."

183. Ibid., pp. 154, 165, 167, 170.
184. Although
the influence of

Saint-Simonian doctrine on the birth
of the materialist interpretation of history has often been pointed out (see
particularly F. Muckle, Henri de SaintSimon, Jena, 1908, and W. Sulzbach,
Die Anfange der materialistischen Geschichtsauffassung, Karlsruhe, 1911),
these authors appear to have all over-

looked that the crucial passages occur
nearly always in works which are
known to have been written by Comte.
185. Producteur, Vol. I, 1825, pp.

( NOTES

289, 596; Vol. II, 1825, pp. 314, 348;
and Vol. IU, 1826, p. 450. These essays
have been included by Comte in the
collection of Early Essays in the appendix to the Politique positive and
will

be found in the English edition
and 276-332) under the

(pp. 217-275

"Philosophical Considerations of
the Sciences and Men of Science" and

titles

"Considerations

on

the

Spiritual

Power."
186. Early Essays, p. 229.
187. In a review of F. J. V. Broussais,

De

V irritation et de

la folie, 1828,

published in the same year and also
included in the Early Essays. See particularly p. 339.
188. Ibid., p. 219.

189. Ibid., pp. 295, 281.
190. Ibid., p. 250.

191. Ibid., pp. 306, 320-324.
192. Ibid.,p.2%2.

The curious simistatement to certain

193. Ibid., p. 281.
larity

of

this

thoughts of Hegel, which will occupy
us later, will not escape the reader.
194. Ibid., p. 307.
195. Ibid., pp. 319-20: "Every doctrine presupposes a founder."
196. Ibid.,p. 301.
197. J. S.
Mill,

Autobiography,

1873, p. 213.
198. O.S.S.E., XXIII, p. 99.
199. Ibid., p. 152.

200. Ibid., Vol. XV, p. 82.
201. H. Gouhier, La jeunesse d'Auguste Comte, Vol. II, p. 3.
202. Quoted by G. Pinet, Ecrivains

Penseurs Poly technicians, 2nd ed.,
Paris, 1898, p. 180, from the Livre
nouveau, Resume des conferences
faites d Menilmontant.
203. On Enfantin and the SaintSimonians generally see S. Charlety,

et

du Saint-Simonisme, Paris,
1896 (new ed., 1931), still the best
exposition of the Saint-Simonian movement. It is rather surprising that EnHistoire

TO PAGES 139-145)

231

fantin himself has not yet been made
the subject of a monograph. S. Charl-

bnfantin, Paris, 1930, is merely a
useful collection of texts with a brief
introduction.
204. !S. Charlety, Enfantin, p. 2.
205. Cf. H. Grossmann, "ihe Evo-

ety,

Revolt against Classical Economics," Journal of Political Economy,
October 1943, who contends that in this
exposition I have overrated the originality of the Saint-Simonians at the
expense of Saint-Simon himself. I am
lutionist

quite ready to agree that nearly all
the elements of their system can be

works that appeared during
life and under his name
(though partly written by Comte and

found

in

Saint-Simon's

probably others); but they are there
so mixed up with other and in part
contradictory ideas that I should rate
the achievement of something like a
coherent system by his disciples considerably higher than Dr. Grossmann
does.
206. "Le travail de

a servi a
duction a
Doctrine
Premiere

M. A. Comte

.

.

.

plusieurs entre nous d'introla doctrine de Saint-Simon."

de Saint-Simon, Exposition,
Annee, ed. Bougie and E.

Halevy, Paris, 1924,

443.

p.

Comte

G. d'Eichthal, Dec. 11,
1829) claims even more influence on
the Saint-Simonians: "Vous savez fort
bien que je les ai vus naitre, si je ne
les ai formes (ce dont je serais du reste
les pr6fort loin de me glorifier)
tendues pensees de ces messieurs ne
(in a letter to

.

.

.

;

sont autre chose qu'une derivation ou
plutot une mauvaise transformation de

conceptions que j'ai presentees et qu'ils
ont gat6es en y mettant les conceptions
h6terogenes dues a ... Saint-Simon."
E. Littr6, Auguste Comte et la philosophic positive, Paris, 1863, pp. 173-4.
207. Producteur, Vol. 1, 1825, Introduction.
208. On Hazard see

W.

Spiihler,

Der

Saint-Simonismus. Lehre und Leben

(NOTES TO PAGES 145-149)

232
von

Saint-Amand Bazard

(^Lurcher

Volkswirtschaftliche Forschungen, hg.
v.

M. Saitzew, No. 7) Zurich, 1926.
209. See Louis Reybaud, Etudes sur

les rtformateurs contemporians ou socialistes modernes, Brussels, 1841, p.

61: "M. Enfantin trouvait la pense,

M. Bazard

la

formulait."

Compare

also: C. Gide and C. Rist, Histoire des
doctrines Iconomiques, 4th ed., 1922,
p. 251.

210. Producteur, Vol. I, p. 83.
211. Producteur, Vol. I, pp. 399 et
seq; Vol. Ill, pp. 110 and 526 et seq.
Bazard's articles were the immediate
occasion for one of Benjamin Constant's

most eloquent essays

in defence

of liberty.

a

212. Producteur, Vol. Ill, p. 74.
213. Producteur, Vol. IV, p. 86.
214. O.S.S.E., Vol. XXIV, p. 86. In
letter to Fourael of June, 1832

(quoted by G. Pinet, "L'Ecole Polytechnique et les Saint-Simoniens," Revue de Paris, May 15, 1894, p. 85),
Enfantin describes the Ecole Polytechnique as "la source pre*cieuse ou
notre famille nouvelle, germe de Fhumanite* future, a puise* la vie. Or, le
proletaire et le savant aiment et respectent cette glorieuse Ecole."
215. See Ch. Pellarin, Jules Lechevalier et

Abel Transom,

1877,
which, however, deals largely with the
part the two men played later in
the Fourierist movement. Lechevalier,
after studying

Paris,

German philosophy

in

France, actually spent a year in Berlin
in 1829-30 to attend Hegel's lectures.
216. See Sadi Carnot, Biographic et
manuscrit publies sous les auspices de
l'Acad6mie des sciences avec une pre*face de M. Emile Picard, Paris, 1927,
p. 17-20. Cf also G. Mouret, Sadi Carnot et la science de I'energie, Paris,
.

1892. The Reflexions sur la puissance
motrice du feu appeared in 1824, al-

though their importance was recognised only much later.
217. See H. Carnot, "Sur le SaintSimonisme," Seances et travaux de
rAcademic de sciences morales at politiques, 47 annee, nouvelle serie tome

XXVIII, 1887, p. 132.
218. See H. Carnot, "Sur

le Saint-

Simonisme," Seances et travaux de
f
l Academic de sciences morales et politiques, 47" annee, nouvelle serie

tome

XX VIII,

1887, p. 129.
219. Doctrine de Saint-Simon, Exposition, Premiere Annee, 1829, Paris,
1830. Deuxieme Annee,
1829-30,

An excellent edition with
a valuable introduction and instructive
notes by C. Bougie and E. Halevy was
published in the Collection des EconoParis, 1831.

mistes et Reformateurs Franfais, Paris,
1924. It is to this edition that all the
page references below refer.
220. C. Bougie in his Introduction
to E. Halevy, L'Ere des Tyrannies,
Paris, 1938, p. 9.

221. [Abel Transon], De la religion
Saint-Simonienne.
Aux Elcves de
I'Ecole Poly technique. First published
in the (second) Organisateur, July-

and reprinted separately,
and Brussels, 1831, and at
the end of the second edition of the

Sept., 1829,

Paris, 1830,

Exposition,

A

Deuxieme Annee 1829-30.

German

1

translation

appeared at

Gottingenin 1832.
222. Exposition,

Halevy,
223.
224.
225.
226.
227.
228.
229.
230.
231.
232.
233.

ed.

Bougie

and

p. 127.

lbid.,pp. 131, 160.
Ibid., p. 89.
Ibid., p. 27.
Ibid., p. 162.
Ibid., p.

206.

Ibid., pp. 139, 89.
Ibid., pp. 73, 124, 153.
Ibid., pp.

203, 206, 234, 253.

Ibid., pp. 236, 350.
Ibid., pp. 208-9.

Exposition,

ed.

Hatevy, pp. 214-216, 238.

Bougl6

and

(NOTES TO PAGES 149-152)

233

234. Ibid., p. 225.
235. Ibid., pp. 239, 307.
236. De la religion Saint-Simoni-

aveugle et a

enne, Paris, 1830, pp. 48-9.
237. Exposition, ed. Bougl6 and
Hal6vy, p. 243.
238. Exposition, ed. Bougl6 and
Hal6vy, p. 244.
239. Ibid., pp. 253-4.
240. Ibid., p. 255.
241. The French word "fonction" of
course also means "office."
242. Exposition, ed. Bougie and
Halevy, p. 257.
243. In a letter to Channing in 1831

concurrence

he admitted "I have shown the defects

cialism."

of the system of free competition, I
have demolished, but I lack the strength
to reconstruct.'* J. C. L. Simonde de
Sismondi, Fragments de son journal et
de sa correspondance, Geneve-Paris,
1857, p. 130. On the general influence
of Sismondi which can here not be adequately discussed see J. R. de Salis,
Sismondi, Paris, 1932.
244. Exposition, p. 258.
245. Ibid., pp. 258-9.
246. Ibid., p. 261.
247. Exposition, pp. 272-3. It may
be noted that this seems to be the first
occurrence of the term "central bank."
248. The following passage from the

249. See below, part HI.
250. Exposition, p. 377. See, however, A. Comte in Lettres a Valat, pp.
164-5, for an informal use of the term
in a letter dated March 30, 1825.
251. Ibid., p. 275. "Industrialism"
was coined by Saint-Simon himself to
describe the opposite of Liberalism. See
O.S.S.E., XXXVII, pp. 178, 195.
252. Ibid., pp. 487, 183.
253. Ibid., pp. 139, 98.
254. Strictly
speaking both the
terms "socialist" and "socialism" had

Exposition, Deuxieme Annee (Premiere Seance, R6sume de 1'exposition
de la premiere annee, ed. 1854, pp.
338-9), deserves, however, to be
quoted: "Pour que cette association industrielle soit ralis6e et produise tous
ses fruits, il faut qu'elle constitue une
hierarchic, il faut qu'une vue generate
pr6side a ses travaux et les harmonise
.
.
il faut absolument que 1'Etat soit
.
en possession de tous les instruments

de travail qui forment aujourd'hui le
fonds de la proprie"t6 individuelle, et
que les directeurs de la soci6t6 industrielle soient charges de la distribution
de ces instruments, fonction que remplissent aujourd'hui d'une maniere si

les proprialors seuleverra cesser la scandale de la
si

grands frais

etaires et capitalistes

ment on

.

.

.

illimitee, cette

grande

n-

gation critique dans 1'ordre industriel,
et qui, considree sous son respect le
plus saillant, n'est autre chose qu'une

guerre acharnee et meurtriere, sous

une forme nouvelle, que continuent se
faire entre eux les individus et les nations." The opening of the passage
shows clearly that at this stage they
were using the term "association," in
precisely the sense in which two years
later they introduced the term "so-

already been used in Italian (by G.
Guiliani) in 1803, but had been forgotten. Independently of this, "socialist"
occurs once in the Owenite Co-opera-

Magazine for November, 1827,
and "socialism" (although in a different sense) in a French Catholic journal
in November, 1831. But it was only
with its appearance in the Globe that
it was immediately taken up and frequently used, particularly by Leroux
and Reybaud. See C. Griinberg, "Der
Ursprung der Worte 'Sozialismus' und
"
Archiv fiir die Geschichte
'Sozialist,'
tive

des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, Vol. H, 1912, p. 378. Cf. also
Exposition, ed. Bougl6 and Hal6vy, p.
205, note.
255. Le Globe, February 2, 1832.
The word occurs in an article by H.

(NOTES TO PAGES 152-157)

234

Jonc&res and the context in which it
occurs is so significant that the whole
sentence may be quoted: "Nous ne
voulons pas sacrifier la personalite aux
socialisme, pas plus que ce dernier &

262. Globe, June 3 and 8, 1831,
quoted by Charl6ty, I.e., p. 110.
263. Karl Gutzkow, Briefe eines
Narren an eine Ndrrin, 1832, quoted
by E. M. Butler, The Saint-Simonian

la personalite."

Religion in Germany, Cambridge,
1926, p. 263.
264. Duveyrier, e.g., one of the oldest members, wrote in the Globe of
January 12, 1832: "On verrait sur la
terre ce qu'on n'a jamais vu. On verrait
des hommes et des femmes unis par un
amour sans example et sans nom, puisqu'il ne connaitrait ni le refroidissement, ni la jalousie; des hommes et des
femmes se donneraient a plusieurs sans

256. Some of the articles of Enfantin in the Globe which have been collected in a separate volume under the
title

Economic

politique et Politique

1832) deserve, however, to be
specially mentioned.
curious account of the motif
257.
for this is given by Eduard Cans,
"Paris in Jahre 1830," in Ruckblicke
auf Personen und Zustande, Berlin
1836, p. 92: "Benjamin Constant er(Paris,

A

zahlte mir, dass, als die St.-Simonisten
Rath geihn vor etwa einem Jahr
fragt batten, wie sic ihre Grundsatze

um

verbreiten konnten, er ihnen gesagt
babe: macht eine Religion daraus."
258. See H. R. d'Allemagne, Les
Saint'Simoniens
Paris,
1827-1837,

1931.
259. See

G. Pinet, Ecrivains et penseurs polytechniciens, 2nd ed., Paris,
1898, p. 176, and S. Charlety, Hlstoire
du Saint-Simonisme, 1931, p. 29.
260. See G. Weill, "Le Saint-Simonisme hors de France," Revue d'histoire
economique et sociale, Vol. IX, 1921,
p. 105. A Saint-Simonian mission consisting of P. Leroux, H. Carnot and

jamais cesser d'etre Tun a 1'autre et
dont I'amour serait au contraire comme

un

divin banquet augmentant en magen raison du nombre et du

nificence

choix des convives."
265. Apparently
the
expression
chercher* a femme derives from this.
266. See J. Lajard de Puyjalon, L*Influence des Saint'Simoniens sur la realisation de Vlsthme de Suez, Paris, 1926.
267. See M. Wallon, Les Saint-Simoniens et les chemins de fer, Paris,
1908, and H. R. d'Allemagne, Prosper

Enfantin et les grandes entreprises du
XlXsiecle, Paris, 1935.
268. On this and the following see
M. Thibert, Le Role social de Van d'apres les Saint-Simoniens, Paris, 1927, H.
Hunt, Le Socialisme et le Roman-

had visited Brussels in February,
1831; and although, apart from the remarks of Weill just quoted, there is no

J.

direct evidence for the influence of the

1935, and J.-M. Gros,

Saint-Simonians on Quetelet,

Litteraire Socialiste

others

it is

re-

markable how precisely from this date
his ideas developed in a direction very
similar to Comte's.
tin,

On

this see J.

Lot-

Quetelet, statisticien et sociologue,

Louvain and

Paris, 1912, pp. 123, 356-

367, also 10 and 21.
261. UOrganisateur,

tisme en France, Etude de la Presse
Socialiste

de 1830 a 1848, Oxford,

Le Mouvement

Depuis 1830,

Paris,

1904.

269. For the development of the
Saint-Simonian theory of art, see particularly E. Barrault, Aux Artistes du
Pass6 et de I'Avenir des Beaux Arts,

1830.

Vol.

pp.
202, 213, quoted by C. Chartety, Histoire du Saint-Simonisme, 1931, p. 83.
II,

270. See R. Curtius, Balzac, 1923.
271. See D. B. Cofer, Saint-Simon-

ism in the Radicalism of T. Carlyle,

235

(NOTES TO PAGES 157-159)
Station (Texas)
1931; F.
Muckle, Henri de Saint Simon, Jena,
1908, pp. 345-380; E. d'Eichthal, "Car-

College

lyle

et

le

Saint-Simonisme,"

Revue

Historique, vol. 82-3, 1903 (English
translation in the New Quarterly, vol.
II, London, April 1909); E. E. Neff,
Carlyle and Mill, New York, 1926, p.
210; Hill Shine, Carlyle and the SaintSimonians. The Concept of Historical
Periodicity. Baltimore,

Johns Hopkins

University Press, 1941; and the same
author's note in Notes & Queries,
CLXXI, 1936, pp. 290-293. Why in the
case of Carlyle, as with so many others,
the influence of the Saint-Simonians
blended so readily with that of the

German

philosophers

clearer later.

An

will

become

interesting contrast to

sympathetic reception of
Saint-Simonian ideas is the exceedingly hostile reaction of R. Southey, who
contributed to the Quarterly Review
Carlyle's

(Vol.

XLV,

July, 1831, pp. 407-450)

under the heading

"New

Distribution

of Property" a very full and intelligent
account of the Doctrine de Saint-Simon. See also his letter of June 31,
1831 in E. Hodder, The Life and Work
of the 7th Earl of Shaftesbury, Lon-

don 1886,

vol. I, p. 126. Tennyson, in
a letter written in 1832, still says that
"reform and St. Simonism are, and

continue to be, subjects of the
highest interest .... the existence of
the sect of St. Simonists is at once a
proof of the immense mass of evil that
is extant in the nineteenth century,
and a focus which gathers all its rays.
will

This sect

Germany,

rapidly spreading in France,
and Italy, and they have mis-

sionaries

in

is

London." (Alfred Lord
Memoir by his son, Lon-

Tennyson, A
don, 1897, vol. L,

p. 99.) It is a striking fact that the social novel begins in
England with Disraeli just at the time

when one would expect Saint-Simonian
influences to work in this direction; but
there is, as far as I am aware, no evi-

dence of any influence of the SaintSimonians on Disraeli.
272. See C. G. Higginson, Auguste
Comte, An Address on his Life and
Work, London, 1892 p. 6, and M.
Quinn, Memoirs of a Positivist Lont

don, 1924, p. 38.
273. J. S. Mill, Autobiography,
1873, pp. 163-167. See also ibid. f p. 61,
where Mill describes how in 1821, at
the age of fifteen, he had met in J. B.
Say's house Saint-Simon himself, "not
yet the founder of either a philosophy
or a religion, and considered only as a
clever original."
274. G. d'Eichthal and C. Duveyrier
came in 1831 to London on an official
Saint-Simonian mission. See the Address to the British Public by the Saint-

Simonian Missionaries, London, 1832,
and S. Charl6ty, Histoire du Saint-Simonisme, Paris, 1931, p. 93. See also
St. Simonism in London, by Fontana, Chief, and Prati, Preacher of the
St.
Simonian Religion in England,
London, 1834, reviewed by J. S. Mill in
The Examiner, February 2, 1834.
275. The Letters of John Stuart
Mill, ed. by H. S. R. Elliot, 1910, Vol. I,
p. 20. See also J. S. Mill, Correspondance inedite avec Gustave d'Eichthal,
1828-1842, 1864-1871, ed. by E.
d'Eichthal, Paris, 1898, and also, in
part in the original English, in Cosmopolis, London, 1897-8, especially Vol.
V, pp. 356 and 359-60.
276. The Globe of March 16th,
1832, already reports that "mil pays
n'a consacr6 une attention plus profonde au Saint-Simonisme" than Ger-

many.
277. See H. Fournel. Bibliographic
Saint-Simonienne, Paris, 1933, p. 22.
278. See P. Lafitte. "Mat6riaux pour
la Biographic d' Auguste Comte. I. Relations d'Auguste Comte avec 1'Allem-

agne." Revue Occidental, Vol. VIII,
1882, premier semestre, p. 227, and

"Correspondance d'Auguste Comte et

236

(NOTES TO PAGES 159-160)

Gustave

d'Eichthal,"

ibid.,

Second

Vol. XII, 1891, premier semestre,
pp. 186-276.
279. Ibid., p. 228 and pp. 223 et seq.,
where the review, dated Sept 27th,
1824, is reprinted. It gives among other
things an adequate account of the "law
of three stages."
280. Neue
Monatsschrift
fur
Deutschland, Vol. XXI, 1821 (three
articles) and Vol. XXII, 1827 (three
articles); see also Vols. XXXIV and
for later articles on the same
subject. On Friedrich Buchholz, who
for a period earlier in the century had
been one of the most influential political writers of Prussia, and who in 1802
had published a Darstellung eines
*6rie,

XXXV

neuen Gravitationsgestzes filer die moralische Welt, see K. Bahrs, Friedrich
Buchholz, ein preussischer Publizist
1768-1843, Berlin, 1907, and on
d'Eichthal's relations to

him

particu-

d'Auguste
"Correspondance
Comte et Gustave d'Eichthal," Revue
Occidentale, Vol. XII, premier semes-

larly,

1891, pp. 186-276.
281. See the list of some

tre, Paris,

fifty

pub-

on Saint-Simonism which appeared in Germany between 1830 and
1832, given by E. M. Butler, The SaintSimonian Religion in Germany, Cambridge, 1926, pp. 52-59, which is, however, by no means complete. On this see
R. Palgen's review of this book in
Revue de Lltterature Comparee, Vol.
DC, 1929; also W. Suhge, Der SaintSimonismus und das junge Deutschlications

land, Berlin, 1935.

282. See [Abel Transon], Die SaintSimonistische Religion. Funf Reden
an die Zoglinge der polytechnischen
Schule, nebst einem Vorbericht ueber

das Leben und den Charakter SaintSimons, Gottingen, 1832.
283. Quoted by Butler, I.e., from
Briefe, Weimarer Ausgabe, Vol. XLII,
p. 300, letter dated October 17th, 1830.
284. See
Eckermann, Gesprdche

mit Goethe, under October 20th, 1830,
and Goethe's Tagebucher, under October 31st, 1830, and May 30th, 1831.
285. Rahel. Ein Buch det Anden-

kens fur ihre Freunde, Berlin, 1834,
under the date of April 25th, 1832.
286. See Butler, I.e., p. 70.
287. K. Grim, Die soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und in Belgien,
Darmstadt, 1845, p. 90.
288. See Margaret A. Clarke, Heine
et la monarchic de juillet, Paris 1927,

Appendix II. Butler, I.e., p.
seems that some over-enthusiastic
German admirers of Saint-Simon even
compared him to Goethe, which induced Metternich (in a letter to Prince
Wittgenstein, dated Nov. 30th, 1835)
especially

7 1.

to

It

make

the tart

comment

that Saint-

Simon, whom he had known personally, "had been as complete a cynical
fool as Goethe was a great poet." See
O. Draeger, Theodor Mundt und seine
Beziehungen zum jungen Deutschland,
Marburg, 1909, p. 156.
289. Ibid, p. 430. Cf., in addition to
the book by Suhge already quoted also
F. Gerathewohl, Saint-Simonistische

Ideen in der deutschen Literatur, Ein
Beitrag zur Vorgeschichte des Sozialismus, Munich, 1920; H. v. Kleinmayr,
Welt- und Kunstanschauung des jungen
Deutschlands, Vienna, 1930, and J.
Dresch, Gutzkow et la Jeune Allemagne, Paris, 1904, on another German poet G. Buechner, who was not a
member of the Young German group,
but seems also to have been influenced
by Saint-Simonian ideas. It is perhaps
worth mentioning that he was the elder
brother of L. Buechner, author of
Kraft und Stoft (1855), and one of the
main representatives of extreme materialism in Germany. On G. Buechner,
cf., also G.
Adler, Geschichte der
ersten sozialpolitischen Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland, Dresden, 1885,
pp. 8 et seq., which should also be consulted for some other early German

(NOTES TO PAGES 160-162)

237

particularly Ludwig Gall
Georg Kuhlmann and Julius
Treichler, whose relations to SaintSimonism need investigation. (Ibid.,

Laube 25, Kuehne
Gutzkow 20.

pp. 6, 67, 72).
290. An interesting testimony to the
extent of Saint-Simonian influence in
Germany is a circular directed against

297. M. Hess. Die heilige Gcschichte
der Menschheit, Stuttgart, 1837.
298. See A. Kohut, L. Feuerbach,

socialists,

and

it

later

by the Archbishop of

February

13, 1832.

Trier, dated

See the Allgemeine

Kirchenzeitung, Darmstadt, March 8,
1832.
291. See B. Croce, History of
Europe in the 19th century, 1934, p.
147.
292.

Of

the

young Germans. T.

Mundt and G. Kuehne were both
Hegelian University lecturers of philosophy, and the same is true of the
authors of most of the books reporting

on the philosophical

aspects of SaintSimonism, particularly M. Veit, Saint-

Simon und der Saint-Simonismus, Leipzig, 1834; F. W. Carov6, Der SaintSimonismus und die neure franzosische

Philosophic,

Leipzig,

1831.

I

25,

Mundt 23 and

296. See T. Zlocisti,

Moses Hess,

Berlin, 1920, p. 13.

Leipzig, 1909, p. 77; and Ausgewdhlte
Briefe von und an Feuerbach, ed. by

W.

Bolin, Leipzig, 1904, Vol. I, p. 256,
hi a letter to his brother, dated

where

Frankfurt,

March

12th, 1832, Feuer-

bach explains that "Paris ist ein Ort, an
den ich langst hinstrebe, fur den ich
mich schon langst in einem unwillkiirlichen
Drange, indem ich das
Franzosische schon friiher und besonders seither betrieb, vorbereitet, ein
Ort, der ganz zu meiner Individuality,

zu meiner Philosophic passt, an dem
sich daher meine Krafte entwickeln
und selbst solche, die ich noch nicht
kenne, hervortreten koennen."
299. See T. G. Masaryk, Die philosophischen und soziologischen Grundlagen des Marxismus, Vienna, 1899, p.

have been unable to procure another

35.

work of the same period, S. R. Schneider, Das Problem der Zeit und dessen
Losung durch die Association, Gotha,

300. Cf. G. Adler, Die Geschichte
der ersten sozialpolitischen Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland, Leipzig,
1885, und K. Mielcke, Deutscher Friih-

1834, which judging from its title seems
to contain an account of the socialist
aspects of Saint-Simonism.
B.
293. Cf.
Groethuysen, "Les
jeunes H6g61iens et les Origines du Socialisme en Allemagne," Revue Philosophique, Vol. 95, no. 5/6, 1923, particularly p. 379.
294. In a review

sozialismus, Stuttgart, 1931, pp. 185189.

301. Lorenz

ismus und

von

Stein,

Der

Kommunismus des

Frankreich,

Leipzig,

1842,

Grim, Die soziale Bewegung

Sozial-

heutigen

and K.
Frank"

in

und Belgien, Darmstadt, 1845.
the latter compare K. Marx and F.

reich

of

his

friend

Mundt's Lebenswirren, quoted by W.
Grupe, Mundts und Kuehnes Verhaltnis zu Hegel und seinen Gegnern,
Halle, 1928, p. 76.
295. In 1831, when

the German
movement began, Ruge

On

Engels, The German Ideology (Marxist Leninist Library), London, 1938,
pp. 118-179.
302. Cf. B. Foeldes, "Bemerkungen

was

zu dem Problem Lorenz von Stein
Karl Marx," Jahrbiicher fur National-

years of age. The corresponding ages
of the leading Young Germans were

okonomie und Statistik, Vol. 102, 1914,
and H. Nitschke, Die Geschichtsphilosophie Lorenz von Steins (Beiheft No.

Saint-Simonian

29, Feuerbach 27, Rodbertus 26,
Strauss 23, Hess 19, and Karl Marx 12

238

(NOTES TO PAGES 162-163)

26, Historische Zeitschrift) , Miinchen,
1932.
303. See Maxim Kowalewski in:
Karl Marx, Eine Sammlung von Erin-

nerungen und Aufsatzen, herausgegeben von V. Adoratskij, Zurich, 1934,
p. 223. Judging from a remark by W.
Sulzbach in Die A nftinge der materialistischen

Geschichtsauffassung, Stuttseems to be also
other independent evidence of Marx
having studied Saint-Simonian writings
while still at school. But I have been
unable to trace it.
304. Apart from various earlier
gart, 1911, p. 3, there

works by Muckle, Eckstein, Cunow and
Sulzbach, see particularly Kurt Breysig,
Vom historischen Werden, Vol. II, pp.
64 et seq. and 84 and W. Heider, Die
Geschichtslehre
von
Karl Marx,
"Forschungen" etc. ed. by K. Breysig,
No. 3, 1931, p. 19. These suggestions
have been confirmed by the careful investigation by V. Volgin, "Ueber die
historische

Stellung

Saint-Simons,"

Marx-Engels Archiv, Vol. I/I, Frankfurt a. M., 1926, pp. 82-118.

305. Cf. G. Mayer, Friedrich Engels,
Eine Biographic, Berlin, 1920. Vol. I,
pp. 40 and 108.
306. See H. Dietzel, Rodbertus,

1888, Vol. I, p. 5, Vol. II, pp. 40, 44,
51, 66, 132 et seq., 184-189; Ch. Andler, Les origines du socialisme d'etat en

Allemagne, Paris, 1897, pp. 107, 111;
Ch. Gide and Ch. Rist, Histoire des
doctrines economiques, Paris, 1909, pp.
481, 484, 488, 490.; F. Muckle, Die

inadequate knowledge of the SaintSimonian writings.
307. See F. Mehring, Geschichte der

deutschen Sozialdemokratie, 4th ed.,
1909, Vol. II, p. 180.
308. See Ch. Andler, I.e., p. 101.
309. Another curious and yet completely unexplored case where Saint-

Simonian influence on German thought
seems to have been at work is that of
the economist Friedrich List. There is
at least evidence of his direct contact
with Saint-Simonian circles. List came

to Paris, which he had already visited
in 1823-4, on his return from America
in December, 1830. On his earlier visit
he had already made the acquaintance
of the first editor of the Revue Encyclopcedique, which during his second visit
came into the hands of the Saint-

Simonians and from August, 1831, onwards was edited by H. Carnot. List's
interest, as that

of the Saint-Simonians,

was

largely in railway projects and any
attempt to make contact with people of

similar interests during his visit

must

have led him straight to the SaintSimonians. We know that List met
Chevalier early and that he at least
tried to make the acquaintance of
d'Eichthal. (See his Schriften, Reden,
Briefe, ed, by the Friedrich List Gesellschaft, Vol. IV, p 8.) Two of his articles on railways appeared in the

Revue Encyclopcedique.

I have not
been able to ascertain whether the
Globe, from which he quotes in one of
these articles (a passage for which the

unsuspecting editor of the Schriften
searched in vain in the English Globe

grossen Sozialisten, Leipzig, 1920, Vol.
H, p. 77; W. Eucken, "Zur Wiirdigung
Saint-Simons," Jahrbuch fur Volkswirtschaft und Gesetzgebung, Vol. 45,
1921, p. 1052. The objections which

and Traveller,) was not, as seems much
more likely, the Saint-Simonian Journal of that name. (See Schriften, Vol.
V, 1928, pp. 62 and 554.) Some years

have recently been raised against

later List translated

this

contention by E. Thier, Rodbertus, Lassalle, Adolf Wagner, Zur Geschichte
des deutschen Staatssozialismus, Jena,
1930, pp. 15-16, seem to be due to an

Louis Napoleon's
Napoleoniennes, the Saint-Simonian tendencies of which we shall
yet have to note. As it is now known
that he wrote the first version of his

Idees

(NOTES TO PAGES 163-164)
chief work, the Nationale System der
Politischen Oekonomie, during a third
much more extended stay in Paris in
the 'thirties as a prize essay and that in
that essay he felt himself compelled to

defend himself against any suspicion of
"Saint-Simonism" in the sense of communism in which it was then generally
understood (Schriften, Vol. IV, p.
294), there can be little doubt that any
marked resemblance to Saint-Simonian
ideas we find in his later work are likely
to be due to that source. And such
similarities are indeed not wanting. Particularly List's conception of "natural

laws of historical development," according to which social evolution
necessarily pass through definite stages,
an idea readily accepted by the historical school of German economists, is
most likely of Saint-Simonian origin.

How

strong in general the French influence on List was, of this his declamations against "ideology" bear witness.
That the other German author from
whom the historical school of German
economists derived its preoccupation
with the discovery of definite stages of
economic development, B. Hildebrandt, derived his ideas from the

Saint-Simonians has been pointed out
J. Plenge, Stammformen der ver-

by

gleichenden Wirtschaftstheorie, Essen,
1919, p. 15.
310. See H. Louvancour, De Henri
Saint-Simon a Charles Fourier, Char1913, and H. Bourgin, Fourier,
Contribution a Vetude du socialisme
tres,

Frangais, 1905, particularly pp. 415 et
seq.

311. See

M. Dommanget,

Victor

Consideranty Sa Vie, Son Oeuvre, Paris,
1929.
312. On the Saint-Simonian elements in Proudon's doctrine see particularly K. Diehl. Proudbon, 1888-1896,
Vol. HI, pp. 159, 176,280.
313. There may even have been a
direct influence

on

early English social-

ism.
ters,

239

At

least one of T. Hodgskin's letwritten in 1820 soon after his re-

turn from France, shows fairly definite
traces of Saint-Simonian ideas. See E.

Halevy, Thomas Hodgskin, Paris, 1903,
pp. 58-9. 1 owe this reference to Dr. W.
Stark.

314. Mazzini was in the years between 1830 and 1835, particularly dur-

ing his exile in France, in intimate contact with the Saint-Simonians P. Lerroux and J. Reynaud, and the effect of
this can be traced throughout his work.

See on this G. Salvemini, Mazzini (in
G. d'Acandia, La Giovine Europa),
Rome, 1915, passim, O. Vossler, Mazzini's politisches Denken und Wollen
(Beiheft No. 11 Historische, Zeitung)
Munchen, 1927, pp. 42-52, and B.

Croce, History of Europe, pp. 118, 142.
On Mazzini's later critical attitude toward Saint-Simonism see his "thoughts

on Democracy" in Joseph Mazzini, A
Memoir by E. A. V[enturi], London,
1875, particularly pp. 205-217.
315. See G. Weill, "Le Saint-Simonisme hors de France," Revue d'histoire
economique et sociale, Vol. IX, 1921,
p. 109, and O. Vossler, I.e., p. 44.
316. See N. Mehlin, "Auguste Strindberg," Revue de Paris, Vol. XIX, Oct.
15th, 1912, p. 857.
317. See A. Herzen, Le monde Russe
et la revolution, Paris, 1860-62, Vol.

VI, pp. 195 et seq.
318. See G. Weill, I.e., and J. F. Normano, Saint-Simonian America, Social
Forces, Vol. DC, October, 1932.
319. See Ernest Solvay, A propos
de Saint-Simonisme (Principes liberosocialistes d'action sociale). Projet de
1903
lettre au journal Le Peuple,

(printed 1916). Cf. P. Heger and C.
Lefebure, Vie d'Ernest Solvay, Brussels, 1929, pp. 77, 150.
320. The post-war Product eur was
published in Paris from 1919 by a
group which included G. Darquet, G.
Gros, H. Clouard, M. Leroy and F.

240

(NOTES TO PAGES 164-166)

On

Delaisi. See on this M. Bourbonnais,
Les Neo-Saint'Simoniens et la vie so-

after 1864.

ciale d'aujourd'bui, Paris, 1923.
321. Cf. also G. J. Gignoux, "L'ln-

London, 1936, pp. 33 et seq.
323. See J. Hansen, G. v. Mevissen,

dustrialisme de Saint-Simon a Walter
Rathenau," Revue d'histoire des doc-

Berlin, 1906, Vol.

trines

economiques

et soc tales, 1923,

and G. Salomon, Die Saint-Simonisten,
Zeitschrift fur die gesamte Staatswistenschaft, Vol. 82, 1927, pp. 550-576.
On the influence Saint-Simonian ideas
had in the conception of the corporativist theories of Fascism see Hans

Reupke, Unternehmer und A r better in
der fascistischen Wirtschaftsidee, Berlin 1931, pp. 14, 18, 22, 29-30, 40.

322. See Johann Plenge, Griindung
des Credit Mobilier,
Tubingen, 1903, particularly pp. 79
et seq., and the passage quoted there
on p. 139 from the Annual Report of
the Cr6dit Mobilier for 1854: "Quand

und Geschichte

nous touchons a une branche de 1'industrie, nous dsirons surtout obtenir
son developpement non par la voie de
la concurrence, mais par voie d*association et de fusion, par 1'emploi le plus
economique des forces et non par leur

this see

V. C. Smith,

The Rationale of Central Banking,

I, pp. 60, 606, 644-6,
Daebritz, Griindung und
Anfdnge der Discontogesellschaft, Berlin, Muenchen, 1931, pp. 34-36.
324. See H. M. Hirschfeld, "Le

655, and

W.

Saint-Simonisme dans les Pays-Bas. Le
Credit Mobilier Neerlandais": Revue
d'Economie Politique, 1923, pp. 364374.

325. See F. G. Steiner, Die Entwicklung des Mobilbankwesens in Oesterreich von den Anfangen bis zur Krise

von 1873, Wien, 1913, pp. 38-78.
326. See H. M. Hirschfeld, Der
Credit-Mobilier Gedanke mit besonderer Beriicksichtigimg seines Einflusses in den Niederlanden. Zeitschrift
fur Volkswirtschaft und Sozialpolitik,
N.F., Vol. Ill, 1923, pp. 438-465.
327. See G. v. Schulze-Gaeveraitz,
Die deutsche Kreditbank (Grundriss
derSozialokonomikV/2) 1915, p. 146.
328. See M. Wallon, Les Saint-Si-

recipro-

moniens et les Chemins de Per, Paris,
1908, and H. R. d'Allemagne, Prosper

the distheories
Pereires
and we must refer in this respect to
J. B. Vergeot, Le Credit comme stimulant et regulateur de V Industrie, La con-

Enfantin et les grandes entreprises du
XlXsiecle, Paris, 1935.
329. See the Vues politiques et pratiques sur les travaux publiques en
France, published in 1832 by the four
Saint-Simonian engineers, G. Lam6,
B. P. E. Clapeyron and S. and E.

opposition et leur destruction
que."
There is no space here for
cussion of the Saint-Simonian
of credit in the hands of the

ception Saint-Simonienne, ses realisations, etc., Paris, 1918, and K. Moldenhauer, Kreditpolitik und Gesellschaftsreform, Jena, 1932. But it may just be
mentioned that the Pereires, after acquiring the Banque de Savoy with its
note issuing privilege, hi order to be
in a position to put their theories into
practice, became ardent advocates of
"free banking" and the cause of the
great controversy between the **free
banking" and the "central banking"
school which raged hi France in and

Flachat.
330. Quoted
et

penseurs

by G.

Pinet, Ecrivains

polytechniciens,

1887, p. 165.
331. See C. Pecqueur,

Paris,

Economic so-

des interets du commerce, de J7fldustrie et de Vagriculture, et de la civilisation en general, sous Vinftuence des
applications de la vapeur, Paris, 1838.
332. Particularly Jourdan, an intimate friend of Enfantin, and Gu6rault.
On the latter compare Saint-Beuve,
Nouveaux Lundis, IV; and on Saintciale:

(NOTES TO PAGES 166-168)
Beuve's

own

relations to Saint-Simon-

ism M. Leroy, "Le Saint-Simonisme de
Saint-Beuve," Zeitschrift fur Sozialwissenschaft, vol. VII, 1938, pp. 132-147.
333. See A. Guerard, Napoleon 111,
Harvard University Press 1943, p. 215,
where this description of Napoleon III.
is

called "strikingly accurate";

and H.

241

sic die letztereren an wissenschaftlicher Bedeutung. Es kommen in
der neuesten socialistischen Literatur

uberragen

sehr wenig erhebliche Gedanken vor,
die nicht bereits von jenen Franzosen

ausgesprochen waren, noch dazu meist
in einer viel wiirdigern, geistreichen

Form."

N. Boon, Reve et realite dans Voeuvre
economique et sociale, The Hague

under the

1936.
334. Des
Idles Napoleoniennes,
1839, L'idee Napoleonienne, 1840, and
De Iextinction du pauperisme, 1844.
335. On this whole phase of their activities see G. Weill, "Les Saint-Simoni-

necessaires pour reorganiser la societe
and republished under the above title
only in 1824.
340. Page references to the Cours
will be to the second edition, edited by
E. Littr6, Paris, 1864, the pagination of

ens sous Napoleon III," Revue des
etudes Napoleoniennes, May 1931, pp.
391-406.
336. Cf. E. Hal6vy, "La doctrine

which

in
Saint-Simonienne,"
L'Ere des Tyrannies, Paris, 1938, p. 91.
337. See L. Brentano, "Die gewerbliche Arbeiterfrage," in Schonberg's
Handbuch der politischen Oekonomie,

from the admirable condensed English
version by Miss Martineau (The Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte.
Freely translated and condensed by
Harriet Martineau. Third edition in two
volumes. London, 1893. In references

economique

1882, p. 935 et seq.
338. K. Griin, Die soziale Bewegung
in Frankreich und Belgien, 1845, p.
182. It is interesting to compare this
statement with a manuscript note by
Lord Acton (Cambridge University Li1st ed.,

ed.,

1849,

vol.

I,

p.

250:

1822
Prospectus des travaux

identical with the third

and

and

fifth

fourth, but not with the

first

editions. English quotations in the text

will

be taken, wherever practicable,

to this edition the title will be abbreviated as P.P. as distinguished from the

St.
its

are here concerned,

dissolved, that fructify."
C/. also J. S.
Mill, Principles of Political Economy,

2nd

is

title

French original referred to as Cours).
Although the coincidence of the exact date is no more than an accident,
it is perhaps worth pointing out that
the year 1842, in which the concluding
volume of the Cours appeared and
which for our purposes thus marks the
conclusion of the "French phase" of
the strand of thought with which we

brary, Acton 5487) in which, a propos
Bazard, Acton says: "A system is shut
in. It is the broken fragments of it,

Simonism, "during the few years of

339. Originally published in

public promulgation, sowed the seeds
of nearly all socialist tendencies which
have since spread so widely in France'*;

and W. Roscher, Geschichte der Nationalokonomik in Deutschland, 1874,
845: "Und es lasst sich nicht leugnen,
wie diese Schriftsteller [Bazard, Enfantin, Comte, Considerant] an praktischem Enfluss auf ihre Zeit mit den

p.

heutigen Socialistenfiihrern gar nicht
verglichen werden konnen, ebenso sehr

is

also the year

which more than any other may be regarded as the beginning of the "German phase" of the same development,
with which we hope to deal on another
occasion. In 1842 Lorenz von Stein's
Sozialismus und Communismus im
beutigen Frankreich and J. K. Rodbertus' first work Zur Erkenntnis unserer staatswirtschaftlichen Zustdnde
appeared and Karl Marx sent his first
essays to the publisher. In the preceding

242

(NOTES TO PAGES 168-171)

year Friedrich List had published his
Nationale System der Politischen

1'explication des phenom&nes du monde
exterieur, notre sentiment immediat des

Oekonomie,

and L. Feuerbach his
Wesen des Christentums. In the follow-

phenomenes humains;

ing year there appeared

contraire, la philosophic positive est
toujours caracterisee, non moins profondement, par la subordination neces-

W.

Roscher's

Vorlesungen uber die
historischer
nach
Staatswirtschaft
Metbode. The special significance of
Grundriss zu

this date in

German intellectual

history

well brought out by H. Freund,
Soziologie und Sozialismus. Bin Beitrag
zur Geschichte der deutschen Sozialtheorie um 1842. Wurzburg, 1934.
341. Cours, II, p. 438.
342. The essential unity of Comte's
thought, which had always had its deis

1

fenders, has since G. Dumas investigations (Psychologic de deux Messies

1905) been accepted
French scholars concerned with these questions. See on this

positivistes, Paris,

by

practically all

the recent survey of the discussion in

H. Gouhier, La jeunesse d'Auguste
Comte, Vol. I, Paris, 1933, pp. 18-29,
and the two works by P. Ducass6,
Methode et intuition chez Auguste
Comte and Essai sur I'origine intuitive
du positivisme, both Paris, 1939.
343. Cf. the interesting confession

by Mr. H. G. Wells

in his Experiment
Autobiography, London, 1934, p.
658 "Probably I am unjust to Comte
and grudge to acknowledge a sort of
priority he had in sketching the modem
outlook. But for him, as for Marx, I
have a real personal dislike."
344. Cf. Cours, I, p. 9: "L'etat
m6taphysique, qui n'est au fond qu'une
simple modification general du premier." Also IV, p. 213.
345. Cf. L. Levy-Bruhl, La philosophic d'Auguste Comte, 4th ed., Paris,
1921, p. 42, and Cours, V, p. 25.
346. Cours, II, p. 312, and IV, p.
in

:

469.
347. Cpurs, HI, pp. 188-9: Le v6ritable esprit g6n6ral de toute philosophic th6ologique ou m6taphysique
consiste a prendre pour principle, dans

saire et rationelle
1

homme

soit

a

celle

tandis que, au

de la conception de

du monde. Quelle que

1'incompatibilite

manifested, a tant de

fondamentale
titres,

entre ces

deux philosophies, par 1'ensemble de
leur developpement successif, elle n'a
point, en effet, d'autre origine essentielle, ni d'autre base permanente, que
cette simple difference d'ordre entre

ces

deux notions 6galements indispens-

ables.

En

faisant predominer,

comme

1'esprit humain a du, de toute n6cessit6,
le faire primitivement, la consideration

Thomme sur celle du monde, on est
inSvitablement conduit a attribuer tous
les phenomenes a des volontes correspondantes, d'abord naturelles, et ensuite extra-naturelles, ce qui constitute
le systeme theologique. L'etude directe
du monde exterieur a pu seule, au conde

traire, produire et d6velopper la grande
notion des lois de la nature, fondement
indispensable de toute philosophic positive, et qui, par suite de son extension
graduelle et continue a des phenomenes
de moins en moins r6guliers, a du etre
enfin appliquee a l'6tude meme de
rhomme et de la societ6, dernier terme
de son entiere g6n6ralisation. .
.
L'6tude positive n'a pas de caractere
plus tranch6 que sa tendance spontan6e
et invariable a baser 1'etude reelle de
Fhomme sur la connaissance prSalable
.

du monde ext6rieur." Cf. also IV, pp.
468-9.
348. Cours, IV, p. 256.
349. Cours, I, p. 16, cf. also II, p.
3 12, IV, p. 230.
350. Cours, I, p. 12.
351. Cours, VI, p. 600. Cf. Early
Essays on Social Philosophy, translated
from the French of Auguste Comte by
H. D. Hutton, London (Routledge's

(NOTES TO PAGES 171-177)

New
As

Universal Library), 1911, p. 223.
of some interest that nearly all

it is

the basic ideas were already clearly
stated in Comte's Early Essays, references to the corresponding passages in
these will occasionally be added to the
references to the Cours.
352. Cf. L. Grunicke, Der Begriff

243

Vorteil gegeniiber den Naturwissenschaf ten. Die 'Grenzen des Naturerkennens' und die hieraus fiir das theoretische Verstandnis der Naturphanom-

ene sich ergebenden Schwierigkeiten
bestehen in Wahrheit nicht fur die
exakte Forschung auf dem Gebiete der
Sozialerscheinungen. Wenn A. Comte

der Tatsache in der positivistischen
19.
Jabrhunderts,
Philosophic des

die 'Gesellschaften' als reale Organis-

Halle, 1930.
353. Cours, VI, pp. 402-3, cf. also I,
pp. 30-32: "L'organe observe et 1'organe observateur tant, dans ce cas,
identique, comment 1'observation pourrait-elle avoir lieu?", and III, pp. 538-

Art, denn die naturlichen,
auffasst und ihre theoretische Interpretation als das unvergleichlich komplizi-

541. P.P. II, 385, and I, 9-10, 381-2.
354. Cours, I, p. 30.
355. Cours, III, p. 535.
356. Cours, III, p. 540.
357. Cours, III, pp. 533, 563, 570.
358. Cours, III, pp. 429-30, and 494,
P.P. I. p. 354.
359. Cours, III, pp. 336-7, cf. also
III, pp. 216-7 and Early Essays, p. 219.
It is interesting to note that while the
passage in the early work states simply:
"L'action personelle de Thomme sur
les autres etres est la seule dont il comprenne le mode, par le sentiment qu'il
en a" (A. Comte, Opuscules de la phi-

men, und zwar

als

Organismen kompli-

zierterer

und schwierigere wissenschaftProblem bezeichnet, so befindet er
sich somit in einem schweren Irrtum.
Seine Theorie ware nur gegeniiber So-

ertere
liche

zialforschern richtig, welche den, mit
RUcksicht auf den heutigen Zustand der
theoretischen Naturwissenschaften, ge-

radezu wahnwitzigen Gedanken f assen
wiirden, die Gesellschaftsphanomene
nicht spezifisch sozialwissenschaftlich,
in
naturwissenschaftlich
atomistischer Weise interpretieren zu
wollen."

sondern

363. Cours, IV, pp. 356-7, P.P.

II,

p. 97.

364.
365.
366.
367.
368.

losophie sociale, 1819-1828, Paris,
1883, p. 182), this becomes in the corresponding passage of the Cours (IV.
p. 468): "Ses propres actes, les seuls
dont il puisse jamais croire comprendre
mode essentiel de production."
le

Cours, VI, p. 599.
Cours, I, p. 122, III, p. 295.
Cours, III, p. 29.
Cours, III, p. 291.
Cours, IV, pp. 365-7. Early Essays, pp. 193-198.
369. Cours, III,"' lecon, VI, p. 671.
370. Cours, III, pp. 321-2.
371. Cours, IV, p. 258, cf. Early Es-

(Italics ours.)

says, p. 239.

360. Cours, I, pp. 10, 44.
361. Cowry, VI, p. 601.
362. Cf. C. Menger, Untersuchuniiber die

Methode der

Sozialwissenschaften, Leipzig, 1883, p. 15 note,
where he argues that in the exact social
sciences "sind die menschlichen Individuen und Bestrebungen, die letzten

gen

Elemente unserer Analyse, empirischer
Natur und die exakten theoretischen
Sozialwissenschaften somit in grossem

372. This has often been noted and
particularly E.

commented upon. See
Bernheim,

Geschichtsforschung

und

Gottingen,
Geschichtsphilosophie,
1880, p. 48, and Lehrbuch der historischen Methode, 5th ed., 1908, Index
s.

v.

"sozialistisch-naturwissenschaft-

liche oder kollektivistische Geschichts-

auffassung."
373. There
this aspect in

is

one vague reference to

Cours, IV, pp. 270-1.

244

(NOTES TO PAGES 177-181)

374. See below, pp. 316-17.
375. Cours, IV, p. 15, footnote.
376. Defourny, La Philosophic positiviste.

Auguste Comte,

Paris, 1902, p.

57.

377. Sociologie

is

introduced

in

(Letter dated September 8th,
1824.)
384. Cours, I, p. 51, U, p. 20, VI,
p. 618, Early Essays, p. 191.
385. Cours, V, 14, cf. also V, p. 188,
where it is explained that "ces denom138-9.

p. 180.

inations de grec et romain ne designent
point ici essentiellement des societes
accidentelles et particulieres; elles se

378. Cours, I, p. 29, IV, pp. 230-1.
379. The Cours is dedicated to Fourier and De Blainville, the two men
among these four who were still alive
at the time of its publication.
380. It may however be mentioned,
since it does not seem to have been
noticed before, that the distinction be-

rapportent surtout a des situations nene pourrait
qualifier abstraitement que par des locutions trop compliqu6es."
386. Cours, I, p. 65.
387. Cf. Cours, VI, pp. 620, 622.
388. Cf. the concluding sentences in
Professor Morris Ginsberg's recent So-

tween Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft,

ciology (Home University Library,
1934, p. 244): "The conception of a
self-directing humanity is new and as

Cours, IV, p. 185, lois sociologiques
appears first a few pages earlier, IV,

popularized by the German sociologist
F. Toennies, already appears in Comte,
who stresses the fact that "domestic relations do not constitute an association
but a union." (Cours, IV, p. 419, P.P.,
116.)
381. Smith's influence appears in a
clear and rather surprising form when

II,

Comte

asks: "peut-on reellement con-

cevoir, dans 1'ensemble des

enes naturels,

phenomun plus merveilleux spec-

tacle

que cette convergence regulliere
continue d'une immensite d'individus, doues chacun d'une existence
pleinement distincte et, a un certain
degr6, inde'pendante, et neanmoins tous
disposes sans cesse malgr6 les differences plus ou moins discordantes de
leur talents et sourtout de leurs caractfcres, a concourir spontane*ment, par
une multitude de moyens divers, a un
meme deVeloppement general, sans
s'etre d'ordinaire nullement concertos,
et le plus souvent a 1'insu de la plupart
d'entre eux, qui ne croient obeir qu'a
et

leurs impulsions personelles?" Cours,
IV, pp. 417-8.

382. Cours, IV, p. 436, P.P., II, p.
121.
383. Lettres d*Auguste Comte a M.
Valat, 1815-1844, Paris, 1870, pp.

cessaries et generates, qu'on

yet vague in the extreme. To work out
its full theoretical implications, and,
with the aid of the other sciences, to
inquire into the possibilities of its realization, may be said to be the ultimate
object of sociology."
389. This was, perhaps, even more
true of the Continent, where it was generally known that the various "sociological societies" consisted almost exclusively of socialists.
390. Cours, VI, p. 670.

391. Cours,VI,p. 671.
392. See above p. 198.
393. The "grammarians are even
more absurd than the logicians."
Syst&me de politique positive, II, pp.
250-1.
394. R. Mauduit, Auguste Comte et
la science economique, Paris, 1929,
full reply to
particularly pp. 48-69.

A

Comte's strictures on political economy
has been given by J. E. Cairnes in an
essay on "M. Comte and Political

Economy,"

first

published in the Fort-

nightly Review, May, 1870, and reprinted in Essays on Political Econ-

omy, 1873, pp. 265-311.
395. Cours, IV, p. 196.

(NOTES TO PAGES 181-187)
396. Cours, IV, p. 194, P.P., U, p.

425.

The

fullest

245

account of Quete-

51.

let's life

397. Cours, I, p. 84, IV, pp. 144-5,
257, 306, 361.
398. Cours, VI, p. 547, PJ>., II, p.
412.
399. Cours, IV, pp. 197-8, 255.
400. CoHr$,IV,p. 195.
401. Cours, IV, p. 197.
402. Cours, IV, p. 203, P.P., II, p.

et Sociologue,
Louvain-Paris, 1912.
426. On the reputed influence of the
Saint-Simonians on Quetelet compare
above, p. 153 and note 260.
427. The English translation of the
above passage is taken from H. M.
Walker, Studies in the History of Statis-

Quetelet,

tical

403. COM, IV, pp. 200-1.
404. Cours, IV, p. 203, P.P.,

II, p.

405. Cf. Lettres a Valat, p. 99 (let-

September 28th, 1819) "J'ai
une souveraine aversion pour les travaux scientifiques dont je n'aperc.ois
:

1'utilite soit directe, soit

eloign6e."

406. Cours, I, p. 42.
407. Cours, IV, p. 139.
408. J. S. Mill, Auguste Comte and
Positive Philosophy, Second edition,
London, 1866, p. 141.
409. Ibid., p. 196.
410. Cours, I, p. 15. Cf. Early Essays, p. 132.

411.
412.
413.
414.

Cours,
Cours,
Cours,
Cours,

'

IV, p. 43.
IV, p. 43, P.P., II, p. 12.
IV, p. 48.
IV, p. 147, P.P., II, p.

39.

415. Cours, VI, p. 495.
416. Cours, VI, p. 511.
417. Systeme de politique positive,
I,

p. 156.

418. Cours, VI, p. 454, Systeme de
I, pp. 151, 361-3, II,

politique positive,
p. 87.

419. Cours, VI, pp. 482-485.
420. Cours, VI, p. 484.
421. Cours, IV, p. 437, P.P.,

II, p.

122.

422. This applies particularly to the
writings of O. Spengler and W. Sombart.

423. Cours, VI, p. 590. Discours sur
positif, ed. 1918, p. 118.
424. Cours, IV, p. 51.

fesprit

is

that by J. Lottin,

Statisticien

Method, Baltimore, 1929,

428. H.

54.
ter dated

and work

M. Walker,

p. 40.
Studies in the

History of Statistical Method^ Baltimore, 1929, p. 29.
429. Cf. L. Dimier, Les maitres de
la contre-revolution, Paris,

1917, pp.

215-235.
430. J.

S. Mill, Auguste Comte and
Positivism, p. 2.
431. For a full account of English
Positivism see R. Metz,
Hundred
Years of British Philosophy, London,

A

1936, pp. 171-234, and J. E. McGee,
Crusade for Humanity The History
of Organized Positivism in England,
London, 1931. On Comte's influence in
the United States see the two studies
by R. L. Hawkins, Auguste Comte and
the United States (1816-1853), 1936,
and Positivism in the United States

A

(1853-1861),

1938

(both

Harvard

University Press).
432. This penetration of Comtian
positivism into Germany through the
medium of English authors is a curious
reversal of the earlier process when
English seventeenth and eighteenth
century thought had become known to
Germany largely through the instrumentality of French writers, from
Montesquieu and Rousseau down to
J. B. Say. This fact explains to a large
extent the belief, widely held in Germany, that there exists a fundamental
contrast between "Western" naturalist
and German idealist thought. In fact,
if such a contrast can at all be drawn,
there is a much more continuous difference between English thought, as repre-

246

(NOTES TO PAGES 187-193)

say, by Locke, Mandeville,
Smith, Burke, Bentham and the
classical economists and, on the other
hand, Continental thought as represented by the two parallel and very

sented,

Hume,

similar developments which went from
Montesquieu, through Turgot, Condorcet, down to Saint-Simon and Comte,
and from Herder through Kant, Fichte,
Schelling and Hegel down to the later
Hegelians. The French school of
thought which indeed was closely related to English thought, that of Condillac and the "ideologues," had disap-

peared by the time with which we are
now concerned.
433. The infiltration of positivist
thought into the social sciences in Germany is a story by itself which cannot
be told here. Among its most influential
representatives were the two founders
of Volkerpsychologic, M. Lazarus and
H. Steinthal (the former important because of his influence on W. Dilthey),
E. du Bois-Reymond (see particularly
his lecture Kulturgeschichte und Na-

turmssenschaft, 1877), the Viennese
Gomperz and W. Scherer,
later W. Wundt, H. Vaihinger, W. Oswalt and K. Lamprecht. See on this
E. Rothacker, Einleitung in die Geistescircle of T.

wissenschaften,

Tubingen,

1920,

pp.

200-206, 253 et seq., C. Misch, Der
junge Dilthey, Leipzig, 1933, E. Bernheim, Geschichtsforschung und Geschichtsphilosophie, Gottingen, 1880,
and the same authors' Lehrbuch der
historischen Methode, 5th and 6th ed.,
Leipzig, 1908, pp. 699-716, and for the
influence on some of the members
of the younger historical school of

German economists particularly H.
Waentig, August Comte und seine
Bedeutung fur die Entwicklung der
Socialwissenschaft, Leipzig, 1894, pp.

279

et seq.

434. Cf. S. Deploige,
la

morale

et

de

Le

la sociologie,

de
Louvain,

conflit

1911, particularly chapter VI
genesis of Durckheim's system.
435. The direct influence of

on the

Comte

on Charles Maurras should perhaps
also be mentioned here.
436. Cf. W. Jaffe, Les theories economiques et sociales de T. Veblen,
Paris, 1924, p. 35, and R. V. Teggart,
Thor-stein Veblen, A Chapter in American Economic Thought, Berkeley,
1932, pp. 15,43,49-53.
437. Cf. F. S. Marvin,
series

Comte (in the
"Modern Sociologists"), London,

1936, p. 183.
438. Cf. E. Bernheim, Lehrbuch der
historischen Methode, pp. 710 et seq.

Part Three
1. Bernard Bosanquet, The Meeting
of Extremes in Contemporary Philosophy, London, 1921, p. 100.
2. See Hutchinson Stirling, "Why
the Philosophy of History Ends with
Hegel and Not with Comte," in "Sup-

plementary Note" to A. Schwegler's

Handbook of

the History of Philosophy, and John Tulloch, Edinburgh
Review, CCLX 1868. E. Troeltsch,

Der Historismus und

seine

(Gesammelte Schriften

Probleme
Tubin-

III)

gen, 1922, p. 24, is inclined to ascribe
even Comte's celebrated law of the
three stages to the influence of Hegel's
dialectics, although it derives in fact
from Turgot. Cf. also R. Levin, Der

des
Positivismus,
Geschichtsbegriff
Leipzig, 1935, p. 20.
3. First published in 1822 in H. de

(

Saint-Simon's Catdchisme des Indus-

NOTES TO PAGES 1 93- 1 94 )

247

trielles as

falles," Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

and two years later republished
separately as System of Positive Polity

Philosophisch-Historische Klasse, 1926,
pp. xlii ff.
14. W. Ashley, Introduction to Eng-

Plan for the Scientific Operations Necessary for Reorganizing Society

"a title premature indeed, but rightly
indicating the scope" of his labors, as

Comte wrote much

later

when he

re-

printed his early works as an Appendix
to his Systeme de politique positive.
translation of this appendix by D. H.

A

Hutton was published in 1911 under
the

Early Essays in Social Philosophy in Routledge's "New Universal
Library," and it is from this little volume that the above English titles and
the later quotations are taken.
title

lish

Economic History and Theory, 3d

1914, I, ix-xi. A. W. Benn, History of British Rationalism, 1906, I,
412, 449; U, 82. E. Caird, The Social
ed.;

Philosophy and Religion of Comte, 2d
ed.; 1893, p. 51. M. R. Cohen, "Causa-

and its Application to History,"
Journal of the History of Ideas, III,
1942, 12. R. Eucken, "Zur Wurdigung
tion

Comte's und des Posivitismus," in Phi-

4. On Comte's early history and his
relation to Saint-Simon see the com-

losophische Aufsdtze Eduard Zeller
gewidmet, Leipzig, 1887, p. 67, and
also in Geistige Stromungen der Gegenwart, 1904, p. 164. K. R. Geijer,

prehensive account in H. Gouhier, La
jeunesse d'Auguste Comte et la Formation du Positivisme, 3 vols.; Paris,

"Hegelianism och Positivism," Lunds
Universitets Arsskrift, XVIII, 1883.
G. Gourvitch, L'idee du droit social,

1933-40.
5. Gustave d'Eichthal to Auguste
Comte, November 18, 1824, and January 12, 1825. P. Lafitte, "Materiaux
pour servir a la Biographic d'Auguste

Comte:

Correspondance,

Comte avec Gustave

d'Auguste

d'Eichthal,"

Revue Occidentale, second

series,

La
XII

II, pp. 186 ff.
Lettres d'Auguste Comte d Divers, Paris, 1905, II, p. 86 (April 11,

19 anne"e, 1891, Part
6.

1825).
7. R. Flint, Philosophy of History in
Europe, I, 1874, pp. 262, 267, 281.
8. J. T. Merz, History of European
Thought, IV (1914), pp. 186, 481 ff.,

A. Fouillee, Le mouvement posi-

1896, pp. 268, 366.
10. E. Meyerson,
explication dans
les sciences, 1921, II, pp. 122-38.
11. T. Wittaker, Reason: A Philosophical Essay with Historical Illustrativiste,

U

tions,

pp.

297.

271,

H. Hoeffding,

Knowledge, New York,
312 ff. G. Mehlis, "Die
und
Hegels
Geschichtsphilosophie
Comtes," Jahrbuch fiir Soziologie, III,
1927. J. Rambaud, Histoire des Doctrines Economiques, 1899, pp. 485,

Historical

1938,

pp.

542. E. Rothacker, Einleitung in die
Geisteswissenschaften, 1920, pp. 190,
287. A. Salomon, "Tocqueville's Philosophy of Freedom," Review of Politics,
1939, 400. M. Schinz, Geschichte
I,
der franzosischen Philosophic, 1914,
I,

2.

W. Windelband, Lehrbuch
new

Geschichte der Philosophic,

501-3.
9.

1932,

Der menschliche Gedanke, 1911, p.
41. M. Mandelbaum, The Problem of

Cambridge, 1934, pp.

7-9.

12. Troeltsch, op. cit., p. 408.
13. E. Spranger, "Die Kulrurzyklen-

theorie

und das Problem des Kulrurver-

1935,

pp.

554

f.

An

article

der
ed.;

by G.

Salomon-Delatour, "Hegel ou Comte,"
in the

Revue

Positiviste Internationale,

LIT, 1935, and LIII, 1936, became
me only after the
to
available

present essay was in the hands of the
printer.
15. F.

Dittmann, "Die Geschichtsphilosophie Comtes und Hegels," Viermssenschaftliche
fur
teljahrsschrift

(NOTES TO PAGES 194-200)

248

Philosophie und Soziologie, XXXVIII
(19 14), XXXIX (19 15).
16. The list of additional names,
which could be extended almost in-

would include, among
others, such ones as Eugen Diihring,
Arnold Ruge, J. P. Proudhon, V.
definitely,

Pareto, L. T. Hobhouse, E. Troeltsch,

W. DUthey, Karl Lamprecht, and Kurt
Breysig.
17.

Quoted by K. R. Popper, The

Society and Its Enemies, London, 1945, II, 25.
18. J. S. Mill to A. Bain, November
4, 1867, The Letters of John Stuart

Open

Mill, ed.
II, 93.
19.

H.

S.

R. Elliot, London, 1910,

Meyerson, op.

cit.,

esp.

chap,

xiii.

20. Meyerson, op. cit., II, 50.
21. J. Laporte, Le Rationalisme de

Descartes, new ed.; Paris, 1950.
22. E.
Buss,
"Montesquieu und
Cartesius,"
Philosophische Monatshefte, IV (1869), 1-37, and H. Tre-

auf
der
Staatslehre Hegels," Schmollers Jahr-

scher,
"Montesquieu's Einfluss
die philosophischen Grundlagen

buch,XLll(\9lS).
23. Cf.

Schinz,

op.

cit.,

and G.

Misch, "Zur Entstehung des franzosischen Positivismus," Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophie, XIV (1901).
24. In a letter of August 5, 1824,
Comte writes of Herder as "predecesseur du Condorcet, mon predecesseur
immediat." See Lettres d'Auguste
Comte a Divers, Paris, 1905, II, 56.
25. Comte, Cours de Philosophie
Positive, 5th ed. (identical with the
1st);

Paris,

Early Essays,

1893, IV, 253; see also
p. 150.

analysis and
criticism of these ideas see part I of
26.

this

For a systematic

volume.

"The Poverty
of Historicism," Economica (N.S.), XI
27. Cf. K. R. Popper,

(1944), 94.
28. Cours, IV, 286: 'Tensemble du

sujet est certainement alors beaucoup
mieux connu et plus immediatement

abordable que

les diverses parties qu'on
distinguera ult6rieurement."
29. C0Hrs,IV,291.
30. Cours, IV, 526.

31. See, for example, E. de Roberty,
Philosophie du siecle, Paris, 1891, p.
29, and Schinz, op. cit., p. 255.
32. Salomon, op. cit., p. 400.
33. Cours, VI, 590; Discours sur
V esprit positive (1918 ed.),p. 118.

34. Cf., for example, Dittmann, op.
cit.,

XXXVIII,

310, and Merz, op.

cit. t

p. 500.

35. Cf. Popper, Open Society, and
Karl Lowith, Von Hegel zu Nietzsche,

ZUrich, 1941, p. 302.
36. This
long-standing confusion
has been accentuated recently by the
fact that so distinguished a historian as
Friedrich Meinecke devoted his great
work, Die Entstehung des Historismus,
to
that
Miinchen,
1936,
entirely
earlier historical school, in contradistinction to which the term historicism
was coined during the second half of
the nineteenth century. See also W.
Eucken, "Die Ueberwindung des His-

torismus," Schmollers Jahrbuch, LXIII

(1938).
37.

Quoted by G. Bryson,

Man and

Society, Princeton, 1945, p. 78.
38. Quoted by Troeltsch, op. cit., pp.
189-90, note.
39. Popper,

"The Poverty of His-

toricism," as quoted above.
40. On Comte's influence

on the

growth of the younger historical school
in German economics compare particularly F. Raab, Die Fortschrittsidee bei
Gustav Schmoller, Freiburg, 1934, p.
72, and H. Waentig, August Comte und
seine Bedeutung fur die Entwicklung
der Sozialwissenschaft, Leipzig, 1894.
41. Most clearly seen in the person
of Wilhelm Scherer. See also Rothacker, op. cit., pp. 190-250.
42. Early Essays, p. 15.

(NOTES TO PAGES 200-204)
43. Court, IV, 298.
44. Cours, IV, 157:

"Car

la vraie

Iibert6 ne peut consister, sans doute,
qu'en une soumission rationelle a la
seule preponderance, convenablement
constatee, des lois fondamentales de la

249

54. A. Thiers, Histoire de la rtvolutionfranfaise (1823-27).
55. T. Carlyle to J. S. Mill, January
12, 1833, in Letters of Thomas Carlyle
to John Stuart Mill, John Sterling and

Robert Browning, ed. Alexander CarLondon, 1910.
56. J.S. Mill to T. Carlyle, February
2, 1833 (unpublished letter in the Na-

nature."
45. Philosophic der Geschichte, ed.
Reclam, p. 77: "Notwendig ist das

lyle,

Verniinftige als das Substantielle, und
indem wir es als Gesetz

tional Library of Scotland).
57. On Hegel's legal positivism see

anerkennen und ihm

particularly H. Heller, Hegel und
der nationale Machstaatsgedanke in

frei sind wir,

als

Substanz un-

Wesens folgen: der objektive und der subjektive Wille sind dann
ausgesohnt und ein und dasselbe un-

seres eigenen

getrubte Ganze."
46. Cours, IV, 144; cf . Early Essays,
p. 132.

For references see Meyerson,
explication, II, 130, and cf. Popper,
47.

U

Society, II, 40.
48. J. S. Mill to Harriet Mill,

Open

Rome,

15, 1855: "Almost all the
projects of social reformers of these
days are really liberticide Comte's

January

so". (F. A. Hayek, John
and Harriet Taylor, Chicago, 1951, p. 216). For a fuller statement of Comte's political conclusions,
whose antiliberal tendencies go far beyond anything Hegel ever said, see

particularly
Stuart Mill

above pp. 183-184.
49. In Comte's "Positivist Calendar"

IV, 266

ff .

58. Cf.

above pp. 88-93.

59. Cf.

my

Individualism and Eco-

nomic Order, Chicago, 1948,

p. 7.

60. Cf. above p. 168 et seq.
61. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach

the

Outcome of

Classical

and

German

New York, 1941, p. 18.
Feuerbach see S. Rawidowicz, Ludwig Feuerbachs Philosophic,
Berlin, 1931; K. Lowith, Von Hegel
bis Nietzsche, Zurich, 1941; A. L6vy,
Philosophy,
62.

On

La

philosophic du Feuerbach, Paris,
1904, and F. Lombardi, L. Feuerbach,
recent English
1935.
Florence,
study of Feuerbach by W. B. Chamber-

A

Zeit-

lain, Heaven Wasn't His Destination,
London, 1941, is unfortunately quite
inadequate. For the widespread positivistic tendencies among the Young Hegelians see particularly D. Koigen, Zur
Vorgeschichte des modernen philoso-

51. Grundlinien der Philosophic des

phischen Sozialismus in Deutschland,
Bern, 1901.

"Month of Modern Statesmanship"
given the name of Frederick the

the
is

and Berlin,
Leipzig
1921, p. 166, and Popper, The Open
Society, II, 39. For Comte see Cours,
Deutschland,

Great!
50. Cf.

H.

Preller, "Rationalismus

und Historismus," Historische
schrift,CXXVI(\922).

Rechts, Preface ("Philosophische Bibliothek," Leipzig, Felix Meiner, 1911),
p. 14.

52.

Systeme de Politique Positive

63. L.

Feuerbach to W. Bolin, Oct

20, 1860, Ausgewdhlte Briefe von und
an Feuerbach, ed. W. Bolin, Leipzig,

1904,

II,

246-47.

356: "La sup6riorite ne*cessaire de la moral d6montr6e sur la

Stein, Der Socialismus
und Communismus im heutigen Frank-

morale revelde."

reich, Leipzig, 1842.

(1854),

I,

53. L'industrie,

Simon, Vol.

Ill,

ed.

H. de

2 m ' cahier.

Saint-

64.

Lorenz

65. See Heinz Nitschke, "Die Geschichtsphilosophie Lorenz von Steins,"

(NOTES TO PAGES 204-206)

250

Historische

Zeitschrift,

Supplement

1932, especially p. 136 for the
earlier literature on the subject; and
T. G. Masaryk, Die philosophischen
und soziologischen Grundlagen des

XXVI,

Marxismus, Vienna, 1899,

On

p. 34.

Lechevalier see H.
Ahrens, Naturrecht, 6th ed.; Vienna,
1870, I, 204; Charles Pelarin, Notice
sur Jules Lechevalier et Abel Transon,
Paris, 1877; A. V. Wenckstern, Marx,
66.

Leipzig,

Jules

1896,

pp.

205

f.;

and

S.

Bauer, "Henri de Saint-Simon nach
hundert Jahren," Archiv fur die Geschichte des Sozialismus, XII (1926),
172.
67.
ist

A careful analysis of the positiv-

influence

on Marx and Engels would

A

direquire a separate investigation.
rect influence extending to surprising
verbal similarities could be shown in
the writing of Engels, while the influ-

Marx is probably more indiSome material for such a study

ence on
rect.

be found in T. G. Masaryk, op. cit.,
p. 35, and Lucie Prenant, "Marx et
Comte," in A la Lumiere de Marxisme,
Paris, Cercle de la Russie Neuve,
will

1937, Vol. II, Part I. In a late letter
to Engels (July 7, 1866), Marx who
was then reading Comte, apparently for
the first time consciously (as distinguished from his probable acquaintance
with Comte's Saint-Simonian writing),
describes him as "lamentable" compared to Hegel.
68. Friedrich List, Nationales System der politischen Oekonomie, 1841.
69. Wilhelm Roscher, Grundriss zu
Vorlesungen liber die staatswirtschaft
nach historischer Methode, 1843.
70. The special significance of the
year 1842 in this connection is well
brought out by D. Koigen, op. cit., pp.
236 ff ., and by Hans Freund, Soziologie
und Sozialismus, Wurzburg, 1934.

Particularly instructive on the influence
of positivism on the German historians

of the period are the letters of

J.

G.

Droysen. See particularly his letter of
February 2, 1851, to T. v. Schon, in
which he writes: "Die Philosophic ist
durch Hegel und seine Schiller fur
geraume Zeit nicht nur diskreditiert
sondern in ihrem eigensten Leben zerriittet. Die Gotzendienerei mit dem
konstruierenden,

ja

Denken

alles

hat,

wurde, zu

indem

schopferischen

ihm

vindiziert

dem Feuerbachschen Wahn-

witz getrieben, der methodisch und
ethisch jener polytechnischen Richtung
ganz entspricht"; and the letter of July

M. Duncker, which con"Weh uns
und unserem deutschen Denken, wenn
17, 1852, to

tains the following passage:

polytechnische Misere, an der
Frankreich seit 1789 verdorrt und verdie

babylonische Mengerei von
Rechnerei und Luderlichkeit, in das
schon entartete Geschlecht noch tiefer
einreisst. Jener bunte Positivismus, den

fault, diese

man in Berlin betreibt, setzt diese Revolution des geistigen Lebens ins Treibhaus." (J. G. Droysen, Briefwechsel,
ed. R. Hiibner, Leipzig, 1929, II, 48,

120.)
71. Cf. D. D. Rosca, L' influence de
Hegel sur Tame, Paris, 1928, and O.
Engel, Der Einfluss Hegels auf die

Bildung

der

Gedankenwelt

Stuttgart, 1920.
72. See S. Deploige,

The Conflict

tween Ethics and Sociology,
1938, chap.

Taines,

St.

be-

Louis,

iv.

73. See P. Barth, Die Philosophic
der Geschichte als Soziologie, 1925.

74. See E. Griinwald, Das Problem
der Soziologie des Wissens, Vienna,

1934.
75. C. Bougl6,

Chez

socialistes, 1918, chap.

les

Prophetes

iii.

76. That Comte's ideas influenced
Veblen seems fairly clear. See W.
Les theories tconomiques et
Jarfe*,
soclales de T. Veblen, Paris, 1924,
p. 35,

I NDEX
Abstraction, use of in natural and social sciences, 68, 69,

70

Acton, Lord, quoted, 103

Ampere, A. M., 112
Anthropomorphism, in natural science,
18;

as

explanation,

science, 57, 80, 81x;
Arago, F. J. D., 112

19;

in

Comte

social

on, 170

Ashley, W., 188
Astronomy, Copernican, 14; as similar
to social science, 42

Bacon, Francis, 14
Bailly, Dr., 140
Balzac, Honore, 157
Bazard, Saint-Amand, 145, 147, 153,
154
Bebel, A., 101
Behaviorism, 45, 48, 77
Bentham, Jeremy, 143
Beranger, P. J. de, 157
Berthollet, Count C.-L., Ill, 119
Bichat, M. F. X., 119
Blanc, Louis, 163, 164, 166
Blanqui, Adolph, 153
Boerne, L., 160
Bonald, L. G. A., 184
Bosanquet, Bernard, 191
Bougie, Celestin, 205

Carlyle,

Thomas,

157, 159,

202

Carnot, H., 146, 147, 148, 154
Caraot, L., 11
Carnot, S., 147
Cauchy, A.-L., 112
Chevalier, Michel, 146, 155, 156
Clairault, Alexis, 105
Classification, scientific, 88 ff.; of perception, 18 ff.; of facts and appearances, 19; according to behavior, 20;
as characteris-

and mathematics, 20;

tic of mental process, 47, 48; as mechanical, 48, 49
Collectivism, as methodology of scien-

ticism,

38,

53

ff.;

and conceptual

54; and historicism, 58;
political, 90, 91, 92; influence on of
Comte and Hegel, 203, 204
Compositive Method, of social studies,
39; in history, 65; and theory of sorealism,

cial structure,

85

Comte, Auguste, and the physicalists,
14; on introspection, 44; his hierarchy of sciences, 48, 173-176; on

anthropomorphism, 57; and the collectivist

approach, 59, 203; theory of

74,
170-173,
199; and
French positivism, 106, 115; collaboration with Saint Simon, 129 ff.;

history,

130, 181, 182; on
social reorganization, 130-134, 183-

Breysig, K., 188
Brisbane, Albert, 160

on economics,

Buchez, P. J. B., 164
Buchholz, Friedrich, 169
Buckle, H. T., 187, 205
Buffon, G. L. L., 106

184; and the Producteur, 142; and
the Saint-Simonians, 144; methodology, 176, 177; sociology, 138,
139, 178, 179, 180, 196, 197, 198;
on freedom, 139, 183, 200; influence of, 186-188; and Hegel,
192 if.; on empirical research, 195,
196; and moral relativism, 201; and

Cabanis, P. J. G., 114, 115, 117
Cabet, E., 153, 164
Carey, Henry, 188

251

252

INDEX

legal positivism, 202; and collectivism, 203; his System of Positive

Policy,

137,

158,

159, 168, 193;
Positive, 166,

Court de Philosophic
169, 173

ff.,

192, 193

tion, 109, 110, 111

Eliot,

Conceptual realism, 54

George, 187

and Saint-Simon-

Enfantin, Prosper,

Condillac, E. B. de, 114, 115
Condorcet, M. J. A., and French Positivism, 59, 107; social theory of,
107, 108; Sketch of the Historical
Picture of the Human Mind, 108;

and Comte, 130; and

136, 137, 165, 166; Comte on, 130,
181, 182
Education, after the French Revolu-

scientific his-

on Quetelet,
and Cartesianism, 196

ism, 144, 145, 148, 152, 153, 166;

on women, 154; imprisoned, 155
Engels, Friedrich, 136, 163, 194, 204
Engineering, task of, 94, 95; type of
mind, 94 ff., and the Ecole Polytechnique, 109, 110, 111

tory, 132; his influence

Euler, Leonard, 105

185;

Exposition

Considerant, Victor, 113, 164
Constructs, role in natural science, 21;
analogy to language, 21, 22
Credit Mobilier, 165

Croce, B., 194
Cuvier, G. L., 114, 115

des

Doctrines

de

Saint

Simon, 147-151
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 194, 204, 206
Fichte, J. G., 196
Flint, R., 194
Fouill^e, Alfred, 194
Fourier, Charles, 111, 154, 163, 17S,

d'Alembert, J. L., and the revolution
in mechanics, 105, 106, 116; and

French Positivism, 107; and SaintSimon, 117; and Cartesianism, 196
Darwin, Charles, 206
de Berry, Due, 135
de Biran, Main, 114
de Blainville, 178
de Brosses, C., 106
Degerando, J. M., 114
d'Eichthal, Gustave, 146, 158, 159, 193
Democritus, 79
Descartes, Ren6, 107, 203, 196
de Stael, Madame, 119
de Tracy, Destutt, 114, 115, 116
Dewey, John, 194
Dittman, Friedrich, 194
Durkheim, Emile, 187, 194, 205
Duveyrier, Charles, 140, 155
Ecole de Medecin, 114, 119
Ecole Normal, 111
Ecole Polytechnique, 105, 109, 110,
111, 112, 113, 115, 117, 127, 140,
143, 146, 148, 152, 169, 185
Economics, subjective character of,
31, 32, 33;

and

ning of, 94

ff.;

prediction, 43; planSaint Simon on, 127,

185
Fourael, Henri, 146
Frederick, the Great, 201
Fresnel, A. J., 112
Gall, F.

17,

J.,

119

Garibaldi, G., 164

Gay-Lussac,

J. L.,

112

Gioberti, V., 164
J. W., 159
Grim, Karl, 162, 166
Gutzkow, Karl, 163

Goethe,

Halevy, Leon, 140, 145
Hegel, G. W. F., and positivism, 58,
202; philosophy of history, 74; on
control of social process, 88, 203204; and Marx, 163, 205, 206; and
Comte, 180, 192 ff.; on empirical research, 195, 196; on aim and method
of social studies, 196, 197, 198; on
freedom, 200; and moral relativism,
202; and historicism, 199, 200; and
totalitarianism, 206; Philosophy of
Law, 193; Encyklopaedie, 193; Philosophy of History, 193
Heine, Heinrich, 159

Herder,

J.

G. von, 196

INDEX
Herzen, A., 164
Hess, Moses, 161, 163
Historicism, 63 ff.; and 'laws' of development, 73; and social wholes,
68 ff.; and variability of the human
mind, 78; of Comte and Hegel, 196-

200
Historical method, as compositive, 65;
and historicism, 65; and social

and rela70
Hobhouse, L. T., 88, 188
Hugo, Victor, 157
Humboldt, Alexander v., 112, 147
Hume, David, 107, 199, 206
Huxley, Thomas, 184
theory, 66, 67, 68, 71, 72;
tivism,

Ideologues, 113, 114, 116
Ideas, constitutive and explanatory,
36, 37
Individualist

social science,

and social policy, 90, 91;
tacked by historicism, 205

at-

Kant, Immanuel, 196, 206
Kowalevski, M. M., 162
Kuehne, G., 161

Lagrange, J.-L., and the Enlightenment, 105; and positivism, 107; and
the Ecole Polytechnique, 111, 112;
and Saint-Simon and Comte, 130,
178
Lamarck, Chevalier de, 114
Lamprecht, K., 188

Language, and scientific constructs, 21,
22
Laplace, Marquis de, and the Enlightenment, 105; and the Ecole Polytechnique; Essai philosophique sur
124; influence on

les Probability's,

Comte and Quetelet, 185, 186
Lassalle, F., 163
A. L., 105, 106
Lechevalier, Jules, 146, 154, 204
Lavoisier,

W.

Lewes, George, 186
Liebknecht, W., 163
List, Friedrich, 166,

205

Louis Phillipe, 153
Loyola, Ignatius, 140

Mach, Ernst, 59
Macrodynamic theories, and scientism,
59,60
Malus, E.-L., 112
Martineau, Harriet, 187

Marx, Karl, and

historicism, 74, 199,

205; influenced by Thierry, 125; and
Saint-Simonism, 152; and the Young
Hegelians, 161, 162; and Comte and
Hegel, 194, 197, 204; and totalitarianism, 204, 205, 206
Mathematics, in natural science, 20;
and sense data, 23

Mazzini, G., 164, 194

Method, of

38;

Lecky,

253

E.,

187

Meinecke, G., 64
Menger, Carl, 83
Merz, J. T., 194
Mevissen, G., 165
Meyerson, Emiie, 194
Mill, J. S., and Comte, 140, 178, 186,
200; and Saint-Simonism, 158; on
Hegel, 195; on moral relativism, 202

Mind, engineering type

of, 16; similarity in different individuals, 23, 24,

26, 46, 77; and social science, 26 ff.,
34; knowledge of, 46; and classification, 47, 48; and collectivism, 57;
and history, 78, 79; control of, 88
Models, in social science, 56; and the
price

system,

57;

and

historical

method, 71
Ill, 119, 130
Montesquieu, Baron de, 130, 196

Monge, G.,

Moral Relativism, and scientism, 92;
of Comte and Hegel, 201, 202
Mumford, Lewis, 123
Napoleon III, 166
Natural Science, influence on social
science, 13

ff.,

method of, 17 ff., and
aim of, 23; and classiand mathematics, 20;

LePlay,F., 153, 164, 186
Leroux, P., 153, 154, 164

constructs, 21;
fication, 18 ff.;

Levy-Bruhl, L., 187

objective character of, 28

ff.

254

INDEX

Needham, Joseph, 88
Neo-Saint-Simoniens, 64
Neurath, Otto, 45, 123
Newton, Isaac, 105; Council of, 20, 21
Niebuhr, B. G., 198
Objectivism, and scientism, 44 if.; and
social energetics, 51; and quantitative measurement, 50; and economic
theory, 52; and the efficiency concept,

and the Council of
Newton, 120, 121; and Physicalism,
122, 123; collaboration with Comte,
his life, 117ff.,

129

ff.;

plan for social reform, 131-

134, 136, 137; on freedom, 136; and
mysticism, 140, 141; influence of,
156ff.; Lettres d'un habitant de

Geneve, 120, 121; Introduction aux
Travaux Scientifiques, 122, 123;
Me moire sur la Science de I'homme,
124, 125; Ulndustrie, 126, 127, 130,

52

Oppenheim,

131; Sy steme Industriele, 135, 159;
Catechisme des Industriels, 136-140;
Opinions litteraires, philosophiques

A., 104

Ostwald, William, 51
Owen, Robert, 163

et industrielles, 140;

Pecqueur,

C,

Pellico, S.,

153, 164, 166

164

Physicalism, 45, 48, 122, 123
Pereire, J. E., 165, 166
Planning, of the social process, 94

Chris-

143-146; and the Exposition, 147152; and Marx, 152; and the Globe,
ff.

Plato, 51, 97, 197

Poinsot, Louis, 11, 147
Poisson, S.-D., 112
Prediction, in social science, 42-43
Prony, Gaspard, 111
Proudhon, P. J., 164

Purposive social formations, 80

Nouveau

tianisme, 140, 141, 157
Saint-Simonism, and the Producteur,

ff.

Quantitative measurement, and social
science, 50, 51; and Quetelet, 184,

185
Quetelet, A., and Saint-Simonism, 153,
164; and statistics, 177, 184, 185,
186; influence in England, 187

Ranke, L. von, 198
Relativism, and historicism, 70
Renan, E., 187, 194
Rodbertus, K., 161, 163, 167
Rodrigues, Olinde, 140, 143, 154
Roscher, Wilhelm, 205
Ruge, A., 161
Rumford, Count, 112
Russell, Bertrand, 100
Saint-Beuve, C. A., 166
Saint-Simon, Henri, and the Enlightenment, 105; on education, 110, 115;

152, 154, 159; religious quality of,
153; alliance with liberal democracy,
153; influence on literature, 157; in
England, 157, 158; in Germany, 159162; on French socialism, 164, 165;
on European capitalism, 165, 166;

on Napoleon

III,

166

Sand, George, 154
Say, J. B., 116, 126, 181
Say, Louis, 115
Schmoller, G., 198, 199
Scientism, defined, 15, 16; and collectivism, 38, 53-63; and objectivism,
44-52; and quantitative measurement, 50, 51; and the macroscopic

view, 59; and historicism, 64-79; and
Marxism, 74; and "purposive" social
formations, 80-87; and control of
social process, 87-93; and economic
planning, 94-102

Simiand, F., 187
Smith, Adam, quoted, 13; and the compositive method, 65; and purposive
social formation, 83; and Comte and
Hegel, 178, 181, 203, 206
Social Energetics, 51
Social Physics, 138, 139
Social Science, subjective character of,
25-35; individualist and compositive
method of, 36-43; anthropomorphic

INDEX
in, 57; use of models, 56,
57, 71; relation to history, 71, 72
Social Structure, and the mind, 34; as

Taine, H., 187, 194, 205
Talabot, P., 166
Tarde, Gabriel, 166

'purposive,' 80 ff.; control of, 88 ff
Social wholes, as constructs of theoret-

Th6nard, Arnaud, 112

concepts

models or popular conceptions,
54 ff.; and the market concept, 56;
and historical study, 71
Sociology of knowledge, 76, 89, 180
Soddy, F., 51
Solvay, Ernest, 51, 164
Sombart, W., 74, 198, 205
ical

Sorel, Georges, 113

Spencer, Herbert, 187
Spengler, O., 74, 205
Spranger, Eduard, 194

and collectivism, 61; and
measurement, 62; and Quetelet, 184,
185
Stein, Lorenz v., 162, 163, 167, 204
Strauss, D. F., 161
Strindberg, A., 164
Statistics,

Subjectivism, of social science, 25-35;
illustrated by economic theory, 31-

32
Sue, Eugene, 157

255

Thierry, Augustin, 125, 126, 142, 162,

164
Thiers, L. A., 202

Transcendentalism, 18
Transon, Abel, 146, 149, 154, 164
Troeltsch, Ernest, 194
Turgot, R. L, 106, 107, 196
R., 159
Veblen, T., 188, 206
Voltaire, F.-M. A. de, 105, 206

Varnhagen,

Watson, J. B., 45
Weber, Max, 98
Weitling, W., 162
Wells, H. G., 123
Westphalen, Ludwig, 162
Whitehead, A. N., 54, 87
Wittaker, Thomas, 194

Young Hegelians, 160
Young Italian Movement, 164

FREE PRESS PAPERBACKS
A
IN THE SOCIAL

NW SERIES

AND NATURAL

OF PAPERBOUND BOOKS

AND

SCIENCES, PHILOSOPHY,

THE HUMANITIES

These books, chosen for their intellectual importance and editorial excellence, are
printed on good quality book paper, from the large and readable type of the clothbound edition, and are Smyth-sewn for enduring use. Free Press Paperbacks conform
in every significant way to the high editorial and production standards maintained
in the higher-priced, case-bound books published by The Free Press of Glencoe.

Andrews,

Wayne

Architecture, Ambition,

and Americans

90067

Cohen, Morris Raphael
Durkheim, Emile

Reason and Nature

90609

The Division

90785

Eisenstadt, S. N.

From Generation to Generation

Friedmann, Georges
Goode, William J.

Religion

Gouldner, Alvin

W.

of

Labor in Society

Industrial Society

90938
91090

Among the Primitives

91242

Patterns of Industrial Bureaucracy

91274

Hayek, F. A.

The Counter-Revolution

91436

Henry, Andrew F., and
James F. Short, Jr.
Janowitz, Morris

The Professional

Katz, Elihu, and
Paul F. Lazarsfeld

Personal Influence

Suicide

of Science

and Homicide

91442

Soldier

91618

91715

Meyerson, Martin, and

Edward

C. Banfield

Politics,

Planning and the Public

Interest

92123

Neumann, Franz

The Democratic and The Authoritarian

Parsons, Talcott

Essays in Sociological Theory

Riesman, David

Individualism Reconsidered:

Simmel, Georg
Sorokin, Pitirim A.

The Sociology of Georg Simmel
Social and Cultural Mobility

Weber, Max

The Theory

State

92291

92403

Unabridged Edition

of Social

92650
92892
93028

and Economic
93493

Organization

For information address:

THE FREE PRESS OF GLENCOE
A

Division of the Macmillan

Company, 60

Fifth Avenue,

New

fork, N. Y. 10011

