New Studies in the Philosophy of Religion
General Editor: W. D. Hudson, Reader in Moral Philosophy,
University of Exeter
This series of monographs includes studies of all the main
problems in the philosophy of religion. It will be of particular
interest to those who study this subject in universities or colleges.
The philosophical problems connected with religious belief are
not, however, a subject of concern only to specialists; they arise
in one form or another for all intelligent men when confronted
by the appeals or the claims of religion.
The general approach of this series is from the standpoint of
contemporary analytical philosophy, and the monographs are
written by a distinguished team of philosophers, all of whom
now teach, or have recently taught, in British or American
universities. Each author has been commissioned to analyse
some aspect of religious belief; to set forth clearly and concisely
the philosophical problems which arise from it; to take into
account the solutions which classical or contemporary philosophers have offered; and to present his own critical assessment
of how religious belief now stands in the light of these problems
and their proposed solutions.
In the main it is theism with which these monographs deal,
because that is the type of religious belief with which readers
are most likely to be familiar, but other forms of religion are not
ignored. Some of the authors are religious believers and some
are not, but it is not their primary aim to write polemically,
much less dogmatically, for or against religion. Rather, they
set themselves to clarifY the nature of religious belief in the light
of modern philosophy by bringing into focus the questions about
it which a reasonable man as such has to ask. How is talk of
God like, and how unlike, other universes of discourse in which
men engage, such as science, art or morality? Is this talk of
God self-consistent? Does it accord with other rational beliefs
which we hold about man or the world which he inhabits? It
is questions such as these which this series will help the reader
to answer for himself.

New Studies in the Philosophy ofReligion

IN THE SAME SERIES

Published
D. z. Phillips Death and Immortality
Richard Swinburne The Concept of Miracle
Vernon Pratt Religion and Secularisation
W. W. Bartley III Morality and Religion

In preparation
Jonathan Barnes The Ontological Argument
D. J. O'Connor The Cosmological Argument
T. McPherson The Argument from Design
T. R. Miles Religious Experience
Ninian Smart The Concept of Worship
Humphrey Palmer The Concept ofAnalog}
I. T. Ramsey The Problem ofEvil
Kai Nielsen Scepticism
David Jenkins The Authenticity of Faith: Existentialist TheologJ
and the Problem of the Knowledge ofGod
W. D. Hudson Wittf!enstein's Influence on the Philosophy of
Religion

Morality and Religion

WILLIAM WARREN BARTLEY III
Professor of Philosophy, University of Pittsburgh

Palgrave Macmillan

©William Warren Bartley, III, 1971
All rights reserved. No part of this publication
may be reproduced or transmitted, in any form
or by any means, without permission.

First published 19 71 by
MACMILLAN AND CO LTD

London and Basingstoke
Associated companies in New York Toronto
Dublin Melbourne Johannesburg and Madras
Library of Congress catalog card no. 7I - I 24948
ISBN 978-0-333-10277-0

ISBN 978-1-349-00744-8 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-00744-8

The Papermac edition of this book is sold subject to
the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise
circulated without the publisher's prior consent, in
any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition
including this condition being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser.

One paradox, however, must be accepted and this is that it is
necessary to continually attempt the seemingly impossible.
Hermann Hesse

The Journey to the East (p. 7)

For Stephen Kresge

Contents

Editor's Preface

lX

Preface

Xl

1 The Reduction of Morality to Religion
2 The Reduction of Religion to Morality

I7

3 Morality and Religion in Conflict

35

4 The Inseparability of Morality and Religion

49

Notes

67

Bibliography

71

Editor's Preface

The logical relationship between morality and religion has been
a matter of controversy amongst philosophers and theologians
from the earliest times and it continues to be a subject of lively
debate. The 'is-ought problem', as it is called, becomes
particularly acute in the present connexion. How are religious
beliefs about what God's will is logically related to moral
judgements as to what men ought to do? Is there a logical gap
between the is and the ought here? Or is the ought groundless
apart from the is? Some thinkers hold to the former view, some
to the latter. This monograph's main purpose is to clear up the
points at issue and to find some solution to the problem.
Like other contributions to the series New Studies in the
Philosophy qf Religion, it combines exposition with criticism.
Professor Bartley reviews the discussion of the relationship
between religion and morality from Plato's question 'Do the
gods love piety because it is pious, or is it pious because they
love it?' to the ideas of modern intellectuals such as Keynes
and Woolf concerning the proper connexion between religion,
in the sense of 'one's attitude towards oneself and the ultimate',
and morality in the sense of 'on~'s attitude towards the outside
world and the intermediate'. Amongst many other subjects,
the author deals with the attempt by some philosophers to
reduce religion to morality reinforced by stories and the attempt
of theologians such as Kierkegaard or Barth to show that
morality is not derivable from religion or vice versa. Throughout he combines clear explanations of what distinguished
thinkers have said with highly original criticisms and suggestions of his own. His very individual treatment of the 'is- ought
question' and his discussion of whether in the light of the most
profound psychological insights available to us it makes any
sense to say that men ought to act morally are but two of the
many subjects on which his opinions are calculated to arouse
lively interest and controversy.
lX

This study, short though it is, will therefore not only be invaluable to the student who is reading philosophy or philosophy
of religion at college or university, but it will be received with
interest by professional philosophers and theologians as a
scholarly and penetrating contribution to thought about both
religion and morality.
W. D. Hudson
University of Exeter

X

Preface

The larger part of the material contained in this study is drawn
from the research and writing I did during my tenure of the
S. A. Cook Bye-Fellowship in Philosophy of Religion at
Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge University. So it is an
especial pleasure to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the Master and Fellows of Gonville and Caius College
for their hospitality and for the growth in my intellectual,
moral and religious experience which it afforded.
W. W. Bartley III
Schenley Heights
Pittsburgh
Christmas 1969

Xl

1

The Reduction of Morality to Religion

The chief aim of this study is to get clearer about the extent to
which morality and religion may be interdependent. I propose
to begin by assuming, as others have done, that there is some
such thing as morality and some such thing as religion, and I
shall take as my first task the clarification of what would be
involved in the interdependence of these two things. We shall
avoid danger of serious muddle only if we bear firmly in mind
that our initial investigation of dependence relationships is
preliminary, and that we must also ask what sorts of things that
might be called morality and religion could be dependent or
independent in the ways charted.
I

Two logical relationships possibly relevant to the question of the
dependence of one thing on another are derivability and compatibility. With regard to the logical relationships obtaining
between their statements, morality and religion are either
derivable one from the other or not, and they are either compatible or not.
Six important alternatives can be charted in terms of these
relationships. First, morality may be derivable from religion
and vice versa. In this case morality and religion are identical.
Second, morality may be derivable from religion but not vice
versa. Morality is a part but not the whole of religion. Third,
religion may be derivable from morality but not vice versa.
Religion is a part but not the whole of morality. In these first
three cases, morality and religion must be compatible; no conflict between them could exist. The fourth case is that in which
morality is not derivable from religion or vice versa but in
which they are fully compatible one with the other. Here the
two are not identical, nor is one a part of the other, but they
I

are consistent - and independent. In the fifth case, morality is
not derivable from religion or vice versa and the two are incompatible to at least some extent but not wholly: some of the
statements of the one are compatible with some of the statements of the other, and some not. Finally, in the sixth case,
morality and religion are totally incompatible. They are
mutually exclusive.
I know of no one who has maintained the sixth alternative.
But each of the first five has been maintained at one time or
other by some philosopher or theologian.

II
On first reading, Theodore Parker's essay on 'The Transient
and the Permanent in Christianity' appears to provide an
example of the first position. 'Christianity', he writes, 'is a simple
thing, very simple. It is absolute, pure morality.' 1 While
Parker may appear to be identifying morality and religion,
closer reading of this essay together with his other work suggests
that what he wants to express is his conviction that morality is
the essential, the permanent and unchanging thing about
religion, not the whole of it. Similar things can be said of most
other writers who appear to be identifying morality and religion.
Whilst one may say 'Morality is religion', and another 'Religion
is morality', they rarely intend any identification of the two.
This is one of two reasons for passing quickly over the first
position and beginning with the second: namely, that morality
is derivable from religion. A more important reason is that,
were morality and religion really identical, the problems of this
study would hardly arise. And in any case, the second position
is the one in which philosophers have, for better or for worse,
shown most interest.
Some theologians and religious writers have found the
second position particularly attractive, just as critics of religion
have found it important to defeat. The appeal to the religious believer of the idea that morality may be derivable
from religion is hardly difficult to explain. For while religion
is under heavy criticism from contemporary thinkers, few
of them have been so bold as to cast aspersions on morality.
So if it could be shown that morality was logically derivable
2

from religion, this would provide added support for the semisociological convictions of some religious believers that society
would give way to 'moral anarchy' were acceptance of religion
to wane.
An ancient philosophical argument can, however, be used
to show that morality is not dependent on religion. This argument, parts of which are found in Plato's Euthyphro, is now
usually argued in terms of the question: 'Is x good because God
wills it or does God will x because it is good?' This question is
usually presented as one about the logical relationships obtaining amongst various kinds of statements, and embedded in an
argument which takes the following course. Whether God does
or does not will certain things is a matter offact- perhaps not
ascertainable fact, but fact all the same. Statements about what
is good are statements not offact but of value. These positions I
share. At this point in the argument some reference to the mistake of deriving 'ought' (value) statements fr9m 'is' (factual)
statements is introduced. It is pointed out that statements about
value cannot be derived from statements about fact; and it
then may be concluded that there can therefore be no logical relationship
between statements of fact and statements of value. This conclusion I
reject, and with it I reject further conclusions based upon it that
there can be no relationship of a logical character between
statements concerning morality and religious statements of a
factual character.
To develop this argument and support the claims just made
- and to evaluate the traditional 'Euthyphro argument' concerning morality and religion, one has to consider just what is
involved in deriving one statement from another logically - in
this case statements about value from statements about fact. To
this task the remainder of this chapter is devoted.

III
It is an elementary but central point of logic that a valid
derivation is one in which when the premises are true the conclusion must also be true. If any given conclusion can be validly
derived from a particular premise then it is equal to or else
logically weaker than the premise: and by the same token, in
such an argument the premises are equal to or logically stronger
3

than the conclusion. In no circumstances may a stronger statement be validly derived from a weaker one.
In the following, I shall be primarily concerned with statements that are stronger or weaker than one another in this
sense. But since I have mentioned that statements equal in
strength may be derived one from the other, it may be useful to
take as our first example of a valid argument such a case.
Thus:
Premise:

Soames Forsyte had no foresight

Conclusion:

Soames Forsyte had no foresight

is a valid derivation. Here the premise and conclusion, being
identical, are equal in strength. And it is obviously impossible
for this derivation to be invalid. Here is a clear case in which
it would be impossible for the premise to be true without the
conclusion being true as well.
Consider another example of a valid argument:
Premise:

Soames Forsyte had much foresight,
(and)
Soames Forsyte had little feeling

Conclusion:

Soames Forsyte had much foresight.

Here is an example of a valid argument in which the premise
is not equal to but stronger than the conclusion, richer in content than the conclusion. And here again, the argument is
valid precisely because when the premise is true then the conclusion must be true.
To produce an instance of an invalid argument, we may
easily juggle our example. Thus the argument:
Premise:

Soames Forsyte had little feeling

Conclusion:

Soames Forsyte had much foresight but
little feeling.

is invalid. The conclusion is stronger than is the premise.
Although both premise and conclusion here may be true, that
4

is a contingent matter having nothing to do with the validity of
the argument: the conclusion here need not be true when the
premise is true. Possibly Soames Fosyte is poorly endowed with
both foresight and feeling - a possibility not excluded by this
argument.
I have dwelt on these very elementary logical points- ones
which might on the face of it seem irrelevant to our inquiry precisely because they are so familiar and elementary that their
importance in a particular situation may easily be overlooked.
Indeed, some of the central problems of philosophy are little
more than illustrations of different sorts of situations in which a
conclusion cannot be derived logically from a premise that is
weaker than it.
To come to the point: there is no denying that the 'Is/Ought'
Question and the Problem of Induction are two central
problems of philosophy. And the well-known mistake of
deriving evaluative (ought) conclusions from descriptive (is)
premises has in common with Inductive Reasoning at least this
much: both arise from attempts to derive stronger conclusions
from weaker premises.
Take a straightforward example of inductive argument:
Premise:

Soames is a F orsyte and is rich
James is a Forsyte and is rich
Jolyon is a Forsyte and is rich

Conclusion:

All Forsytes are rich.

This simple textbook illustration of inductive reasoning is of
course invalid. There may well be some Forsyte who is not rich.
Only if Soames, James and J olyon were the only F orsytes could
the inference be valid - and even then only if this additional
information were added to the premise, thus strengthening it.
A better illustration of inductive reasoning, more satisfactory
to the symbolic logician or philosopher of science, would take
as one's conclusion an 'All' statement covering an infinite
number of cases- as our example does not, since the number of
Forsytes is presumably finite however great their wealth. But
the example suffices to make the point.
Now consider the sort of argument that one might and indeed'
can find in moral argument:

5

Premise:

x is conducive to the greatest happiness
of the greatest number, and xis good.
y is conducive to the greatest happiness
of the greatest number, andy is good.
z is conducive to the greatest happiness
of the greatest number, and z is good.

Conclusion:

All things which are conducive to the
greatest happiness of the greatest
number are good.

Here embodied in one example we find a conclusion about what
is good and a straightforward example of inductive reasoning.
The argument happens to be invalid. But what is curious is that
persons who discuss such arguments sometimes say that the
reason that they are invalid is that a conclusion about goodness
or value has been derived from statements about matters of
fact or past experience. But this information - even if it were
correct, as it is not (the premises are by no means purely descriptive!) - has nothing to do with the reason why the argument
is invalid. The argument is invalid because it is inductive; and
an inductive argument is invalid because its conclusion is
stronger than the collective strength of its premises.
Another element, not yet mentioned, is involved in both the
Is/Ought mistake and in inductive reasoning. In both cases we
have statements the merits of which must be decided - in the
first instance these statements being of an evaluative character
and in the second instance the statements being scientific projections about the future or 'universal statements'. The problem
is to 'justify' these statements, taken as the conclusions of arguments of justification, when it can be shown that the available
justifiers, or statements which might be used as premises in such
a justifying argument, are not sufficiently strong to entail the
statements in question. A scientific statement of universal form
cannot be derived from, justified by, a finite set of observation
statements considered evidence for it. Nor can a statement
about goodness, or about what one ought to do, be derived from,
justified by, factual information alone. Moreover, even when-as
in our example - evaluative material is added to what is descriptive in the premises, that alone does not suffice to entail
the evaluative conclusion. The premise must be strong enough to
6

entail the conclusion. To some of these problems we shall return
later. First we need to relate the discussion of this section to the
question of the relationship of morality and religion.

IV
An important reason for this preliminary excursiOn into the
Is/Ought question and inductive reasoning, and into the
question of the logical relations that may obtain amongst
various kinds of statements has been to provide a better purchase
on what I have called the 'Euthyphro Argument' concerning
morality and religion.
A minor historical licence has been taken in dubbing this
argument the 'Euthyphro Argument', since although a similar
argument is to be found in Plato's Euthyphro, the formulation as
well as the structure of the argument is somewhat different.
Plato discusses the question: 'Do the gods love piety (oatov)
because it is pious, or is it pious because they love it ?' 2 To
avoid any problem of historical or philological exegesis connected with Greek concepts of piety or divinity, I have taken the
liberty, as have those other modern and contemporary writers
who have traced this question to the Euthyphro, of rephrasing
the question as: 'Is x good because God wills it or does God will
x because it is good?'
If one answers this question by affirming that x is good because God wills it, one commits- or at least appears to commit
-the Is/Ought mistake. One derives or justifies the goodness of
x from what is taken to be the fact that God wills x. One is
deriving an evaluative statement from a factual statement. On
the other hand, if one says that God wills x because it is good, it
appears that the goodness of xis independent of God's wishes,
or to put the matter differently, that morality is radically
independent of the wishes of God.
One's answer to this question bears importantly on one's
assessment of the nature of the interdependence of morality and
religion, but it does not, as some persons have supposed, bear
on the question whether one is religious, let alone on the question whether one is a Christian. For instance, although both
St Thomas Aquinas and William of Occam were Christian
theologians, Thomas concluded that God willed something
7

because it was good, whereas William thought God's commandment the very basis of goodness.
The Euthyphro question can now be clarified schematically
in terms of our discussion in the previous section. Take the
following inference:
Premise:

God willsx

Conclusion:

xis good.

Taken out of context these two statements appear to be independent and the inference invalid: one cannot derive q from
p, or vice versa. Our conclusion here no more follows from the
premise than the premise follows from the conclusion. So the
inference is invalid quite regardless of the evaluative character of
the conclusion and the presumably factual character of the
premise.
It is. of course possible to make our conclusion follow from
an augmented premise which not only includes the original
premise but also appears prima facie to provide a reasonable
context for the argument. For instance:
Premise:

God willsx
If God wills x then x is good

Conclusion:

xis good.-

This argument is formally valid; but possibly an exorbitant
price has been paid for validity, and without any dependence
of morality on religion even having been shown. A great deal
will depend on the way we interpret the added premise: 'If
God wills x then xis good.' It might be interpreted as a 'meaning
rule'. Someone might say that what is meant by 'good' is
'something conforming to God's will'. But such a move is
highly unsatisfactory. For one thing, it turns the added premise
into a triviality. For now 'If God wills x then xis good' means,
by substitution, 'If God wills x then x is something conforming
to God's will.' In short, 'God wills what God wills.' Moreover,
were such an interpretation taken, then the inference from 'God
wills x' to 'x is good' would be a tautological transformation.
8

Nor is it any help to say that 'something conforming to God's
will' is not the meaning of 'good' but how 'we' or some class of
persons mean or use 'good'. Non-Christians do indeed use the
word 'good' differently. But even within the so-called JudeaChristian tradition there has been debate about whether what
God wills is good - consider the Book of Job. Thus it seems
pointless to say that even Christians mean by 'good' 'something
conforming to God's will', let alone that this is the meaning of
'good'. The question we are dealing with is not a verbal one;
or rather, if it is a verbal question, it is perhaps not worth dealingwith.
Another interpretation of the statement 'If God wills x then
x is good' is that it is a synthetic causal statement. In effect, what
is meant is that if God wills x, then that renders x good. It is
important to notice, as regards this interpretation, that if it is
correct, then the question whether morality is derivable from
religion is not settled. On the one hand, an evaluative statement: 'xis good', ha.r been derived from premises pertaining to
religion. On the other hand, two premises were required:
( 1) God wills x, and (2) If God wills x then x is good. But the
second premise is also evaluative, and so the question whether
morality is derivable from religion is simply shifted back a step.
If we disallow such a shift, then difficulties in the interpretation
of 'If God wills x then x is good' as a synthetic statement persist.
First, this interpretation simply begs the question whether
morality is dependent on religion. It appears that we have to
choose between shifting the question and begging the question.
To avoid begging the question we would have to advance some
reason to justify our claim that God's willing of x renders x
good. How would this be done? How do we know that when
God wills x, then x is good? To suggest that this is something
known on faith is unsatisfactory since faith may be defined as a
deliberate self-conscious begging of the question. Another
possible answer is to say that we know this from experience.
The difficulty here iH that this answer appears to commit us to
the Is/Ought mistake- viz., we appear to be claiming that we
can justify an evaluat:ive statement by appealing to experience.
But even if we overlook this, difficulties still remain. Suppose
we were to argue that by appealing to experience we mean to
claim that in all past cases experienced by us, whenever God
has willed something, that something has turned out to be good.
9

Several questions jump at one when one considers such a claim.
Do we ever in fact have experience of God's willing something?
There is no straightforward answer, unless what is meant by
'experience' is, say, the expressions or demonstrations of God's
will that are reported in certain putative sources of revelation,
such as the Bible.
What about the other part of the claim? Do we ever experience something's turning out to be good, or something's being
good? Since there is some sense, however unclear, in which we
do experience things as good, it is presumably legitimate to
answer this question affirmatively.
But one thing we do not experience is a causal relationship
between God's willing something and the goodness of that
thing. Even were we to assume that we do have experience of
God's willing something, and even if we do have experience in
some as yet unclear sense of things being good, we have no
experience of a causal relationship obtaining between these
two. At best - on the assumption that we are privy. to God's
will - we have an experience of constant conjunction between
those things willed by God and those things we experience as
good. In this case, two problems arise.
First, it would appear that we can experience something as
good independently of experiencing it as willed by God; a
constant conjunction, even if it existed, would provide no
evidence for the causal claim that x is good because God wills
it.
Secondly, as we might expect from this rather Humean
argument, we are involved in inductive reasoning and invalid
inference. Frame the situation schematically:
Premise:

God willed a and a was good
God willed b and b was good
God willed c and c was good
God willed d and d was good

Conclusion:

Whatever God wills is good.

Like all inductive arguments, this argument is invalid. But
even if it were- per impossibile- valid, it would still not justify
the claim that xis good because God wills it. Which brings us
10

back to the problem of causation: even if whatever God wills is
as a matter of fact good, we might say that he wills it because it is
good. It is not necessary to deny that whatever God wills is good
in order to deny that something is good because God wills it.
Indeed, the only way to prevent a denial that something is good
because God wills it is to claim that something becomes good
only by God's willing it and is otherwise not good.
This conclusion, however, puts us in a rather curious position.
We have just reviewed a number of difficulties that arise when
one attempts to derive the claim that something is good from
the information that God wills it by means of adding the further
premise, 'Whatever God wills is good.' Now it appears that even
if we could satisfactorily defend the claim that whatever God
wills is good, we still would not have addressed ourselves in an
acceptable way to the Euthyphro question. Our problem comes
to this: derivability, even were it possible, is not enough. We are
concerned with the causal dependence of morality on religion,
a relationship that cannot be captured by the mere derivability
- even if that were possible - of moral statements from religious
statements. In order to establish that something is good because
God wills it and not vice versa, we must show that morality is
solely dependent on religion, or derivable solely from religious
statements. This we have not done: effects can be produced by
a plurality of different causes; conclusions can be derived validly
from a plurality of different premises. Possibly many things God's will amongst them - could render things and actions
good. God's will would be sufficient to render something good
without being necessary to render something good. To probe the
difficulties here is to open a Pandora's Box for philosophical
analysis. For example, when we begin to examine the possible
combinations of necessary and sufficient conditions, we find
that quite intricate accounts of the dependence and independence of morality and religion are possible. There is for example
the following difficulty. Where many moral decisions are
concerned, no directive of a religious character is available. So
that, even if one were to accept that one ought to do what God
wills, one would still have to ascertain by moral reasoning
independent of religious teaching what to do in those situations
concerning which God had not spoken to us. In line with such
difficulties is an interesting essay by Professor Peter Geach, who
suggests that a knowledge of God is not prerequisite to our
II

having any moral knowledge. A knowledge of God's will is not
always necessary. But it is, according to Geach, sometimes
necessary and always sufficient. 3
In sum: in order to derive the statement 'x is good' from the
premise 'God wills x', we should have to augment that premise
with a further premise that turns out to be highly problemmatic. And even if we could -per impossibile - overcome these
problems, we should still not have charted a dependence
relationship between morality and religion that would satisfy
many theologians: we would not have satisfied the theologian
who maintains that morality is solely dependent on religion,
nor would we have satisfied the more modest theologian, like
Geach, who maintains only that morality is sometimes dependent
on God's will.

v
Before turning to the next part of our argument, it may be wise
to repeat a point that hopefully is already clear. That what God
wills is good has not been denied in the foregoing. What has been
suggested is that there appears to be no reason to support the
claim that something is good only if or because God wills it,
let alone the weaker claim that would suffice to insure
derivability of 'x is good' from 'God wills x'. So we have
challenged the first alternative in the Euthyphro question: that
xis good because God wills it; and we have said nothing as yet
in criticism of the second alternative: namely, that God wills x
because x is good.
Indeed, if a certain x were good, then that would help
explain why God, purportedly an all-benevolent being, would
will it. For the reasons given we cannot explain the goodness
of something by the fact (if it is a fact) that God wills it; but the
contrary might be possible. A comparable confusion is sometimes made by philosophers in regard to our intuitions of what
is correct. For instance, the fact that something appears
intuitively convincing or self-evidently true is not sufficient to
guarantee its truth. However, if it is true then that may explain
why it appears intuitively convincing or self-evidently true to
us. The confusions here are not identical, but they are similar
in character.

12

VI
The foregoing discussion would appear to support the view that
evaluative statements cannot be justified by, i.e., derived from,
factual statements, any more than scientific theories can be
justified by, i.e., derived from, observation statements. The
possible novelty of the presentation has been to indicate that
the reasons for this - having to do with logical strength - are
identical in both cases.
From what has been said, however, it is not possible to draw
a conclusion which is all too often drawn in such discussions:
namely, that no logical relationship is possible between
observational statements and scientific theories on the one hand,
or between evaluative statements and factual statements on the
other hand.
That observational statements may bear logically on theoretical scientific statements is a point that has been made
frequently in recent years.' For an asymmetry exists between
justificatory argument and critical argument which permits just
such logical relations. Thus if we take a controversial scientific
theory not as the conclusion of a justifying argument but rather
as a premise in a critical argument, we find that an observational
statement may be related to it through modus tollens. The
falsification of an observational statement made on the basis
of the scientific theory in question leads to the falsification of
the premise in which that scientific theory occurred.
That a comparable situation obtains in moral argumentation
has not been noticed. I propose to show that a moral statement
can sometimes be logically falsified by a factual statement in a
modus tollens argument, and that logical relations thus obtain
between factual and evaluative or normative statements in at
least some cases. That the argument about to follow bears on
religion can be seen in that the example of a moral statement
used is rather like a 'Counsel of Perfection' - of which the
perfect example is, of course: 'Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father which is in heaven is perfect.'
The following argument will assume as correct the doctrine
that 'ought' statements imply 'can' statements in respect to
persons. Thus, in saying that a person ought to do something,
we assume that it is possible for him to do that thing, that he can
do that thing. I have italicised the phrase 'in respect to persons'
13

because I do not wish to claim that it is always true that 'ought'
statements imply 'can' statements. For example, I see no point
to objecting to the statement that, say, 'the world ought to be
different', by saying that the world cannot be different - even
if we could show that the latter were so. It seems perfectly
sensible, without logical contradiction, to maintain at one and
the same time that the world ought to be different and that it
cannot be different. But this interesting issue is not one that
need concern us here; which is a further reason for my restricting my remarks to 'ought' and 'can' statements about
persons. So when I write ' "ought" implies "can" ', I should
be understood as referring only to cases where persons are
concerned.
On our assumption, the following argument is valid:
Premise:

Jones ought to be a genius

Conclusion:

Jones can be a genius.

And suppose that we have evidence indicating that the
conclusion is false. We might learn, for instance, that Jones is
suffering from extensive organic brain damage, or that he has
an 'I.Q.' unusually below normal. Whilst one might reasonably
question the results of an I.Q. test, one probably would accept
sound evidence of massive brain damage as proof that it is
false that Jones can be a genius. But then, by modus tollens, it is
false that Jones ought to be a genius. And we have used a
factual consideration in evaluation and criticism of a moral
statement.
Take a more topical example, the punishment of criminals,
an issue both of morality and of public policy - and a controversial question amongst religious thinkers. Suppose that one
argues that one ought not to punish criminals but to treat them
all psychologically in order to cure them of criminal tendencies.
To this proposal it may be retorted that 'ought' implies 'can',
and that there exist some criminals - for example, those with
certain genetic defects - whom it is impossible to cure by
psychological treatment. The example is not fanciful: the XYY
chromosomal abnormality has been widely associated by
researchers with criminal behaviour and/or low intelligence in
adult males; and recent studies suggest that one male in 300
14

may be born with just this abnormality.' This factual information, which bears logically on the original proposal for a
different public policy, will if taken seriously lead to a
modification of the proposal. Dr ParkS. Gerald, of the Harvard
Medical School, has urged that a large-scale study of XYY
incidence should be done, because a 'great deal of social
planning could be related to this. These people [with XYY
syndrome] might still get into trouble despite present welfare
programs.' 6 Since such arguments can easily be misused,
perhaps it is necessary for me to add here that a demonstration
that one proposed alternative to punishment runs into diffi-·
culties in certain cases is in itself no argument on behalf of
punishment. Whatever the facts concerning the XYY chromosomal abnormality may be, the problem of punishment
remains to be dealt with.
Such arguments in which ' "ought" implies "can" ' can be
used to enable factual claims to rebut prescriptive remarks are
by no means unusual. Quite the contrary, they are rather
common. Bishop Robinson provided an interesting illustration
when he reported the response to his proposal that capital
punishment be abolished in favour of attempts to reform even
the most hardened criminals. The response is reported in the
0 bserver as follows :
Then came the letters; a week after tlle sermon they were
piled on chairs and the floor in his study, a tide of sour
disagreement.... 'Well, you bloody fool,' one began. A
woman from Hampstead wrote briefly to say that 'There are
evil men who are unredeemable.' 'This is all rot,' claimed an
anonymous writer. 'Just HANG 'em. I say dam the church
and such talk.' 7
In the Observer article from which these excerpts are taken,
no mention of the XYY chromosomal abnormality is made.
And outside an informed medical context the claim that there
just are 'unredeemable men' might be dismissed as an admittedly factual but nonetheless untestable metaphysical statement.
The studies in genetics just mentioned, however, indicate that
such expressions may be given a quite hard and very testable
scientific interpretation, one much harder to dismiss.
Although to demonstrate that there may be logical relations
15

between factual and normative statements is important, it is
just as important not to overestimate or overinterpret what has
been shown. I have not shown that all moral statements are
empirically falsifiable, only that some are. And even when we
are concerned solely with those which are empirically falsifiable,
I see no point in drawing from this information certain conclusions about the nature or character of these moral but
empirically falsifiable assertions. For instance, I do not in any
event accept the suggestion that empirical testability is the
hallmark of a scientific theory, and I would under no circumstances wish to grant that falsifiable counsels of perfection are
scientific statements !8

16

2

The Reduction of Religion to Morality
Thus, in Victorian England, we find that the apostles of
progress, having swept their churches clean of sacraments,
altars, priests and pulpits, leaving nothing save a bare
structure of ethical assertions, returned to curtained,
cushioned, upholstered homes in which every sort of buried
sexual superstition, traditionalist tyranny and emotional cant
served as covering for dirty unswept corners and nameless
secular filth.
Quentin Bell: Bloomsbury (p. 28) 1
I

In another book, The Retreat to Commitment, I treated a version
of our third possibility: that religion is reducible to morality. 1
There I argued that one such position- represented by what
was known as Protestant liberalism - was ·quite convincing for
a long period during the nineteenth century, but that it was
decisively undermined by biblical exegesis as well as by philosophical and social criticism during the early decades of the
twentieth century. I have just referred to this position as a
version of our third possibility, and the qualifier should be taken
seriously. For one thing, it is doubtful that Protestant liberalism
did ever achieve a full reduction of religion to morality. For
another, the defeat of Protestant liberalism was carried out
within a Christian framework. That no reduction of religion to
morality could be carried out within Christianity by no means
implies that there is no religion which may not be reducible to
morality. Confucianism is a possible candidate example of such
a reduction.
We shall return to Protestant liberalism later, when our fifth
alternative - the conflict between morality and religion - is
considered. There would, however, be little point in discussing
again here what I have already written about at length in The
Retreat to Commitment, and I refer the interested reader to
that book for my views on that matter. Nor can I discuss
Confucianism or other Eastern religions here, not for lack of
interest, but for want of space.
17

Rather, I shall centre my attention on the curious half-life
existence that the attempt to assimilate religion to morality has
led amongst certain British and American philosophers in
recent years. I have in mind the sort of approach represented
by R. B. Braithwaite's well-known study, An Empiricist's View
of the Nature of Religious Belief. 1 This choice is not altogether
fortunate; for whereas Protestant liberalism and the movements and ideas associated with it were lively and interesting
phenomena, Braithwaite's approach - which one might think
to call a debased late form of Protestant liberalism - is constructed on naive and uninformed historical scholarship and
philosophical analysis. It has to be discussed, however, because
of its quite considerable influence; it is a sad truth about the
philosophy of religion that some philosophers do not apply to
it the same high analytical standards that they presumably
employ when engaged in symbolic logic or in the analysis of
science.

II
Braithwaite's chief concern was with the meaning of religious
expressions, and his problem was set by the early logical
empiricist criterion of meaning- which had much influenced
him in his youth- according to which only those utterances had
meaning which could be empirically verified or else were
truths of logic. Braithwaite adopts a move common amongst
post-war quondam logical empiricists. Without going so far as
to state bluntly that the empiricist criterion of meaning is
incorrect, Braithwaite is bold enough to suggest that it is not
sufficient, and suggests that when one approaches certain
subjects, such as morality and religion, one may study meaning
in terms of the way assertions are used in these areas, without
worrying about whether they may be verified in the ways
required by early logical empiricists. Claiming that the meaning
of any statement will be given by the way it is used, Braithwaite
sets out to explain how religious statements are used by those
who express their religious convictions thereby.
Without giving away any secrets about how he got there,
Braithwaite quickly comes to the conclusion that religious
assertions are used primarily as moral assertions and may thus
18

be 'assimilated' to moral assertions. Like moral statements,
religious statements are not scientifically verifiable; but they do
nonetheless have a use: to wit, they express 'conative intentions'. A moral assertion expresses the intention of its asserter
to act in a particular sort of way. The primary use of religious
assertions is the same: religious assertions, within the context
of the religious system within which they appear, are declarations of adherence to a policy of action or way of life or pattern
of behaviour.
There is; however, Braithwaite continues, an important but
subordinate sense in which religious assertions may differ
somewhat from some moral assertions. Namely, religious
assertions, unlike moral assertions, will be accompanied by
particular stories. These stories will, at least in Christianity as
interpreted by Braithwaite, be drawn from the Christian
tradition, and they will help support an 'agapeistic' policy of
behaviour. 4 The difference between agapeistic behaviour
patterns as recommended by Christians and exactly the same
behaviour patterns as recommended by proponents of other,
non-Christian, religions, such as Judaism and Buddhism, will
be that in the case of Christians one set of stories will be borne
in mind; in the case of] ews, another set of stories borne in mind;
in the case of Buddhists, yet another set of stories borne in
mind, and so on. It is not at all necessary, on Braithwaite's
account, for the asserter of a religious assertion to believe that
the story he tells is true; he 'entertains' the story mentally in
order to help him - psychologically, causally - to follow a
pattern of behaviour which he might otherwise resist. Braithwaite notes that he has chosen the word 'story' as the most
neutral word he could think of, and allows that other writers
whom he admires, such as Matthew Arnold, have used words
like 'parable', 'fairy-tale', 'allegory', 'fable', 'tale', 'myth', and
so on to express a comparable idea. All of which brings us to
this definition of the professing Christian: 'A man is not, I
think, a professing Christian,' Braithwaite writes, 'unless he
both proposes to live according· to Christian moral principles
and associates his intention with thinking of Christian stories;
but he need not believe that the empirical propositions
presented by the stories correspond to empirical fact.' 5
The only remarkable thing about Braithwaite's account of
religion is that it has been taken seriously by several dis19

tinguished philosophical writers. In the issues of the Cambridge
Review devoted to discussion of Braithwaite's essay, J. N.
Schofield, to be sure, made no secret of his poor opinion of
Braithwaite's lecture. But Professor D. M. MacKinnon and Ian
Ramsey, Bishop of Durham, treated it with respect, MacKinnon
even describing it as a stimulating contribution to the
philosophy of religion for which one should be grateful. 8
Amongst other writers, Professor John Macquarrie has written
that Braithwaite gives 'quite a plausible analysis of religious
language', 7 although several pages later in the same book
Macquarrie writes that Braithwaite has 'surely exaggerated his
thesis beyond what is plausible'. 8 Macquarrie's position is,
then, unclear. On the other hand, we find Mr Renford
Bambrough writing that Braithwaite's study 'is the most
philosophically sophisticated of numerous recent writings in
the same vein'. 9
Part of the explanation for the attention paid to Braithwaite's
contribution to the philosophy of religion may have been the
perhaps inevitable association of this essay with a Cambridge
event, namely: the conversion of Braithwaite to Christianity.
One journalist, reporting the reminiscences of a Cambridge
don, wrote of this:
There has always been a touch of King's College religion
about: Cambridge - the very beautiful King's Chapel, with
its very beautiful choir, where anyone, religious or not,
would like to go to church - which means a touch of
intellectualism and eccentricity. For instance, Richard
Braithwaite, who is a professor of Moral Philosophy here,
was persuaded - philosophically - to become a Christian in
his adult life, but, apparently, only after an exchange of
several letters between him and the church. He certainly
behaved as though a private treaty had been made, with a
table of exemptions for him, and everyone in Cambridge
believed that this was so. When he was baptized, practically
everybody who was anybody in Cambridge was there, except
Wittgenstein. 10

III
One difficulty readers of Braithwaite's pamphlet have had is to
20

determine just what he meant. His key words, such as
'agapeistic', are so vague that it is difficult to know what might
or might not count as such behaviour. Although Braithwaite
has, in the course of replying to some of his critics, specified
some of the things that he did not mean - such as a 'general
policy of benevolence'- what he did mean remains unclear.
So let us adopt as an experiment Braithwaite's own proposal:
that the meaning of an expression is to be found in its use - in
order to determine what Braithwaite himself may, by his own
definition, have meant. How does Braithwaite treat his own
rule - or philosophical behaviour policy - that the meaning
of an expression is to be found in its use? To be more specific,
what does he mean when he indicates that the meaning of a
Christian religious assertion is to be found in its use? Does he
mean that its meaning is to be determined by the way in which
Christians have traditionally used it? Or by the ways in which
they use religious assertions today? No: neither of these is even
considered. Rather, we find that the rule that Braithwaite is
following is this : The meaning of a Christian religious assertion is to
be determined by the use that I (Braithwaite) make of it. There is a
rapid unvoiced transition from the use to my use, from the definite
article to the personal pronoun.
Earlier Protestant liberalism had been undermined when
historical biblical exegesis uncovered the falsity of the liberal
portrait of.jesus, a portrait deeply permeated by a wrong
interpretation of the .Sermon on the Mount. Thousands of
Protestant liberals soberly abandoned their Christian affiliations
because they could not accept what appeared really to have
been the 'Christian ethic' as objectively determined by biblical
scholarship.
For Braithwaite such considerations as what the 'Christian
ethic', i.e., the morality preached by Jesus of Nazareth, really
may be are beside the point. Not only is the truth of the stories
which he uses to prop up his agapeistic policies unimportant
to him; it is apparently of no importance to him whether
whatever stories he finds in the Christian tradition, or imagines
to be there, are really there at alL He writes (p. 63) :
Since different people will take different views as to what
these fundamental moral principles are, the typical meaning
of religious assertions will be different for different people. I
B

21

myself take the typical meaning of the body of Christian
assertions as being given by their proclaiming intentions to
follow an agapeistic way of life, and for a description of this
way of life - a description in general and metaphorical
terms, but an empirical description nevertheless - I should
quote most of the Thirteenth Chapter of I Corinthians.
Others may think that the Christian way of life should be
described somewhat differently, and will therefore take the
typical meaning of the assertions of Christianity to correspond
to their different view of its fundamental moral teaching.
Again, Braithwaite writes of the stories which are to be used
to prop up moral behaviour: 'The empirical story-statements
will vary from Christian to Christian; the doctrines of
Christianity are capable of different empirical interpretations,
and Christians will differ in the interpretations they put upon
the doctrines' (p. 66). And at the very close of his essay,
Braithwaite concludes, with certainty, that 'it is of the very
essence of the Christian religion' that the questions 'What shall
I do?' and 'What moral principles should I adopt?' must be
answered by each man for himself.
In brief, for Braithwaite the very essence of the Christian
religion is a subjective - arbitrary - choice of moral principles.
Or might one say: The very essence of Christianity is doing whatever
you choose provided that you decorate whatever you choose to do with
stories from the Christian tradition which you may interpret in a1!)1 way
you please.
This is, however, preposterous as an interpretation of the
Christian tradition as it is used; it is a quixotic and eccentric
legislative proposal on Braithwaite's part about how the
Christian tradition might be used. If it were true that nothing
more could be found in Christianity save a few moral homilies,
Braithwaite might indeed be doing Christians a small service
by championing such a use, however little it had to do with the
tradition. But this is clearly not the case. His lip service to
science to the contrary, Braithwaite ignores the objective
findings of scientific historical biblical scholarship when he
defines the essence of Christianity as agapeistic behaviour.
This is hardly the place to expound what the Christian
tradition really is. Better perhaps to insist that there may well
be no such thing as the essence of Christianity, to urge that

22

Christianity is made up of a multitude of different and conflicting policies, stories, doctrines, and also of scientific and
metaphysical assertions. There are, to be sure, parts of the
tradition that stress what one might translate into something
of the sort that Braithwaite evidently means by agapeistic
behaviour - the thirteenth chapter of I Corinthians (which
Braithwaite cites), the first epistle of john, or (when taken out
of context) the Sermon on the Mount. But to concentrate on
these is quite arbitrary. Anyone might of course say that one
particular strand of the Christian tradition appeals to him more
than another. But there is a logical leap from 'I find such and
such an aspect of Christianity appealing' to 'I am a Christian'.
If one finds some aspect of Buddhism appealing is one then a
Buddhist too?
Nor does it help, as Braithwaite appears to think it may, to
say that seemingly conflicting parts of the tradition will support
an agapeistic interpretation if put into context. One might as
well argue that a different claim which some have advanced namely, that Christianity is essentially a prudential ethic
-would also be borne out if put into context. By picking and
choosing, one can find biblical backing and context for dozens
of different behavioural policies.
It can be instructive, if we really do want to put agapeistic
accounts of Christianity such as Braithwaite's into context, to
ask what Christians pray for. How many prayers in the Book of
Common Prayer ask for support in agapeistic behaviour? Very
few. Quite the contrary, prayers tend to ask for protection
against dangers and enemies. The second Collect, for Peace,
in the service for Morning Prayer reads:
0 God, who art the author of peace and lover ofconcord, in
knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service
is perfect freedom; Defend us thy humble servants in all
assaults of our enemies; that we, surely trusting in thy
defence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through
the might ofjesus Christ our Lord.
And for what does one pray at night? The second Collect at
Evening Prayer reads:
0 God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and
all just works do proceed; Give unto thy servants that

23

peace which the world cannot give; that both our hearts
may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee
we being defended from the fear of our enemies may pass
our time in rest and quietness.
And one of the most famous of all prayers, the beautiful prayer
ofSt Chrysostom reads:
Almighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one
accord to make our common supplications unto thee; and
dost promise, that when two or three are gathered together
in thy Name thou wilt grant their requests: Fulfil now, 0
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be
most expedient for them; granting us in this world knowledge
of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting.
Or ought one to consider the Creed of St Athanasius, also in
the Book of Common Prayer, and although not much used in
contemporary times, directed nonetheless to be recited in place
of the Apostles' Creed on Christmas Day, the Epiphany,
Easter Day, Ascension Day, Whitsunday, Trinity Sunday, and
on the Feast Days of eight of the saints? It is very long, and
wears the dress of a philosophical terminology long obsolete. I
shall quote only from the beginning and the end:
Whosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that
he hold the Catholick Faith. Which Faith except everyone
do keep whole and undefiled: without doubt he shall perish
everlastingly. And the Catholick Faith is this: That we
worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; Neither
confounding the Persons; nor dividing the Substance....
And so on for four columns of very small print. Not a single word
is said of love, not a single word in this great creed of the Church
which ends in these words: 'This is the Catholick Faith: which
except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved.' For that
matter, there is not a word about love in the Apostles' Creed,
the most widely used creed of the Christian churches. Why?
Part of the answer seems to be that the creeds were intended in
part to define heresies to be avoided, and to pronounce on
matters over which there had been some disagreement in the

24

early history of the church. That Christ preached some vague
gospel of love has rarely been contested - so vague that there
were few doctrinal disputes about it; and also, I fear, so
uninteresting to the majority of Christians, that it was not
considered necessary to incorporate a reference to it in the
creeds. What was wanted was protection against dangers: give
us that, dear God, and we may even do some loving.
But if there were in the early centuries of the church few
doctrinal disputes about love, historical scholarship has had
something to say about it. One result of nineteenth-century
biblical criticism was that the Sermon on the Mount, which
many took as the paradigm statement of Jesus's gospel of love,
was not at all meant as a general policy of behaviour even for
Christians but was rather what Albert Schweitzer called an
interim ethic, a prudential ethic to be followed by a small
group of Christians isolated from general society expecting the
imminent return of a God who would protect them from the
dangers of that society and indeed set them up as lords over
it. 11 To this topic I shall return in the next chapter.
Braithwaite's account of Christianity is, then, somewhat
simple-minded. The same may be said of his view of literature
in general: for Braithwaite, the chief function of Christian
stories is, like that of myths, parables and other kinds of
literature, to give us causal fodder -to bolster our moral intentions. The function of literature, and in particular the question
whether it is morally uplifting or morally degrading, has been
discussed by philosophers and critics from Plato to F. R.
Leavis- with many rather different conclusions. It is perhaps
worth remarking that one important thing that may happen
when one confronts great literature is that one's perceptions
may be heightened and changed by the artistic and imaginative
presentation of possible human situations. Literature does not
simply strengthen one's moral resolutions; and it would on any
account be superficial to say that this is the function ofliterature.
Literature has no single function and has in fact been used for
many different purposes in the course of its history. Few who
have read such writers as Marcel Proust, Robert Musil, Richard
Hughes, Virginia Woolf, E. M. Forster, have failed to be both
affected and changed by the encounter. Sometimes, of course,
material from this literature may be used to help support one's
previous moral resolutions; but just as often it may have an

25

effect - at once destructive and constructive - of altering
radically one's moral resolutions.

IV
It would be wrong to leave this topic before discussing in
somewhat broader connexion some of the ideas and expressions
that we have been using, such as 'religious assertions' and
'religious language'. Some philosophers are regrettably wont
to talk of something called 'religious language' as if it were a
unique category of discourse, quite separate from other such
categories as 'historical narrative', 'scientific explanation',
'poetry', 'symbolic discourse', 'allegory', 'myth', and several
other ways and modes of speaking. A detailed review of the
reasons for taking, and rejecting, this approach, however
interesting, is not needed here. Suffice it to say that such
accounts of 'religious language', so-called, tend to begin with
the intention of marking it off as one of a number of illegitimate
forms of discourse to be distinguished from one or two legitimate
forms of discourse- such as formal logic and mathematics on
one hand and scientific explanation on the other. Logical
empiricism is one example of such an approach. Later, as this
logical and scientific imperialism was being abandoned, some
philosophers - Braithwaite is a good example - persisted in
speaking of 'religious language', but dropped the earlier
pejorative tone. Now 'religious language' was to be construed
as something with properties all its own, even its own unique
criteria in terms of which religious statements could be validated
or rejected. These thinkers would sometimes maintain that just
as there could be developed a logic of scientific discourse, or a
logic of scientific discovery, so there could be developed a logic
of religious discourse - neither of which could be judged in
terms of the criteria held valid by any of the others.
The results of contemporary investigations in philosophy,
philology, linguistics, anthropology, comparative religion and
other fields provide little support for either of these approaches.
Language is used importantly in religion, but there is no such
thing as 'religious language', any more than there is a single
thing, 'Religion', which has a kind of language appropriate
and peculiar to it: there are many different religions, each

26

with their own distinctive styles of discourse; and even within
a particular religion, such as Christianity, many different kinds
of language are used. There is the rich poetic language, filled
with metaphor and hyperbole, simile, allusion, of the Psalms
or the Song of Solomon. There is the comparatively straightforward historical narrative of much of the Books of Samuel and
Kings and of Joshua, or again, of the Gospels and the Book of
the Acts of the Apostles. There are at one extreme the letters
of Paul, occasionally bordering on the ordinary, and at the
other extreme the altogether extraordinary language of the
Book of Revelations. Also to be mentioned are the various
prayer books and liturgies, the hymns of the churches, and the
oral traditions. So, we may speak of the languages of religions,
or of the language of religions; but we begin to go astray if we
think that there is something which might be called 'religious
language' or that there is a category ofassertions that can easily
be pigeonholed as 'religious assertions'. There is no 'language
of religion' which could be studied exhaustively like, say, the
language of the Hopi Indians during a particular decade; nor
is there a category of religious assertions which could be studied
intensively like an axiom system of symbolic logic or mathematics. One very great theologian, Karl Barth, did say that
the Word of God (which is not to be identified with any human
report of it) could not appropriately have the criteria of
disciplines other than theology brought in judgement upon it.
But even theological criteria remained hypothetical for
Barth; and he would have scoffed at the idea of 'religious
language' .12

v
Having made these remarks about the language of religions, I
hope that no reader will make the mistake of supposing that
what I have to say about religion and language in the following
applies to all religions or even to all language within any
particular religion. Nor do I want to suggest that what I am
about to say about religious language can be true onl.J> of
religious language. Quite the contrary: there are political, and
even scientific systems of thought in which similar things can
happen.

27

Nonetheless, I hope to concentrate on· certain things that
can happen to language when we are careless, and which
appear to happen with peculiar frequency in the languages of
religions. I shall dwell on the dangers of religious discourse without thereby implying that discourse in other areas is
notably safer.
Some eminent theologians - Rudolf Bultmann, Reinhold
Niebuhr, Paul Tillich are examples- have been struck by two
things: they have been worried about the obscurity and
seeming irrelevance to contemporary problems of much
traditional religious language. And they have, as biblical
scholars · and theologians, been especially sensitive to the
immense riches of the Christian heritage - the entire heritage,
not, like Braithwaite, only a tiny segment of it. Tillich, for
example, noticing that some traditional Christian concepts such as that of original sin, which can be explicated in
psychological terms - have not outworn their usefulness, took
as one of his tasks to restate and redefine such concepts, with
the hope of eliminating their supernatural features and of
bringing their still valuable aspects into better focus. 'You ntust
first save concepts,.' he once wrote, 'before you can save souls.'
In his various books and essays, he analysed various human
problems confronting contemporary persons, and attempted to
show that particular biblical themes can provide, when reinterpreted, important insights into these problems. Grace,
redemption, transformation, these- as well as particular stories,
such as that of the dying God, the heroic saviour - can, when
'demythologised' in the light of Tillichian or Bultmannian
scrutiny, aid in the care and cure of contemporary neuroses
and other difficulties. Although one may quarrel in detail with
Niebuhr, Tillich, Bultmann and others who have tried such
approaches, one can hardly object to the general approach.
The Bible is after all rich in wisdom. Moreover, the writers just
mentioned differ from Braithwaite in several important
respects, two of those most relevant here being that they were
never logical empiricists and that their knowledge both of
biblical and other literature is too wide to permit them to
reduce Christianity to a morality coloured and reinforced by a
particular tale.
An important difficulty, however, arises when the demythologised material rendered by these theologians is used in

28

apologetic defence of an exclusively Christian orientation. For
other faiths, not to mention literature, such as Greek tragedy
and Shakespeare - and the novels of Dostoevsky and Bunyan
of which Braithwaite made mention- also contain symbols and
myths embodying important insight about the way men might
confront life-situations. At the moment I am writing these
words, hundreds of copies of the latest edition or re-edition of
the I Ching - an ancient Chinese book of moral and religious
wisdom which, despite its common use as a magic oracle, ranks
with the greatest religious texts - are being bought by young
people in England and America. 13 The Indian tales which
Heinrich Zimmer so ably pop'ularised, such as 'Die Geschichte
vom indischen Konig mit dem Leichnam', and 'Abu Kasems
Pantoffeln', when published in paperback in English quickly
went out of print. 14 And the late David Stacton's novel
Kaliyuga, an extraordinary work, was directly influenced by
Zimmer's researches. 15 These are only a few examples,
taken from relatively popular literature, to illustrate two simple
points: ( 1) religions other than Christianity possess symbols and
myths embodying important truths about the way men might
confront life, and (2) this material is being used by thousands of
Westerners of Christian background daily. What then is to
preserve any claim of Christianity to religious superiority? What
is to mark off the 'true faith' of Christianity from competing
faiths? Interestingly, Paul Tillich, during the final years of his
life, under the influence of studies in comparative religion made
by Mircea Eliade and others, began to retreat from his own
earlier Christian exclusivism.

VI
Yet another problem to be faced is that despite the worthy
intentions of the biblical reconstructionists, their programmes
have backfired, become self-defeating, because they have
led to a profound breakdown of communication amongst
Christians. One source of the breakdown of communication is
a tendency to fit traditional doctrines to new situations by
redefining the words in which the doctrines are phrased. The
traditional doctrines become counters in an elaborate game.
'To be a Christian' begins to resemble 'to go dancing'. All that
29

is needed of a couple dancing is that they both know and
follow the rules. They need agree about no substantial issue:
neither about morals, politics, art nor science. A bitterly
quarrelling married couple may still enjoy dancing - or, pace
Freud, sexual int~rcourse - together; such may remain
activities in which they can co-operate whilst leaving their
many disagreements unspoken. But are two such people truly
communicating?
Or, in the case of two Christians who agree about little
substantial but who in religious services both know when to say
the proper phrases and when and how to carry out the appropriate actions together - are they communicating? They too are
doubtless co-operating - and doing so in what an external
obsereer might interpret as an agapeistic pattern of behaviour.
Yet satisfactory communication with a person presumably
involves appreciation of what he means when he says such
things as: 'I believe in God', 'Jesus Christ is Lord', or 'God
is love'.
By carelessness in the use of language, theologians run the
risk of debasing the rich linguistic heritage of the Christian
tradition. Suppose that one's language has become so debased
that one can no longer tell when one is disagreeing with the
person with whom one is talking. Communication demands
that both parties be able to find out in what respects they
disagree: two people cannot understand each other if they have
no way of determining when they disagree. Yet 'word-healing'
and the ceremonial use of language, as often practised in
contemporary theology, make it difficult for contemporary
Christians to ascertain when they are disagreeing about
religious questions. To the extent to which articulation of
disagreement ceases to occur, to the extent to which what I call
the 'indiscernibility of disagreement' prevails, any kind of
communication, including that religious communication which
is supposed to possess saving power, falters.

VII
It is worthwhile to place these polemical remarks about
religious language in the broader context of the theory of
language, with especial attention to Karl Buhler's famous book
30

Sprachtheorie, first published in 1934 in Leipzig, and recently
republished. 16 Buhler analysed the communicative function
of a language into three components: ( 1) the expressive function,
where the communication serves to express the emotions or
thoughts of the speaker; (2) the signalling or stimulative or
release Junction: that is, the communication serves to stimulate
or to release certain reactions in the hearer; (3) the descriptive
function, which is present to the extent that the communication
describes some state of affairs. These three functions are
separable in so far as each is accompanied by its preceding one
but need not be accompanied by its succeeding one. That is,
one may express without signalling; one may express and signal
without describing. But one cannot signal without expressing,
or describe without both expressing and signalling. Yet another
function has been added to Buhler's set: namely, the argumentative function, to which the same hierarchical ordering
applies: one cannot argue without describing, signalling,
expressingP The first two functions apply, of course, to
animal languages. Animals surely do express and signal. But
the second two functions, describing and arguing about those
descriptions, may possibly be characteristically human although those who research into the life and languages of
animals may well hope for discoveries which will refute at least
some of our views about the limitations of animal communication. There is, for instance, some sense in which bees describe.
As an aid in the understanding of his ideas, Buhler developed
the diagram below .18
The triangle in the middle denotes the linguistic sign. This
sign may be used by the sender or sqeaker to exqress himself; it
may be received by the receiver or listener as a signal or appeal
which may or may not have been intended by the speaker. And
the same sign again may be used - by sender, receiver, or
both - to symbolise some objective state of affairs independent
of the receiver and sender. An application of the scheme to
contemporary art, music and poetry can be very instructive.
Extend the sign beyond conventional language to such things
as works of art. A work of art may express certain subjective
states of mind or intentions on the part of the artist; those who
receive or respond to the work of art may or may not decode it
as it was intended by its original sender. And the work of art
may or may not be representational. To co-ordinate various
31

contemporary theories and modes of artistic expression with
Buhler's schema is an exercise both instructive and amusing.

The Sign
(triangle)

Sound phenomenon
(circle)

If we look fairly at the history of religion, rather than at art,
to determine how these comments about language apply, we
find the following. Despite the attacks of logical empiricists
who would permit religious expressions at best an emotive
meaning, and the· views of such as Braithwaite who would
assimilate religious assertions to signalling and appeal policies
for moral behaviour - things able to be analysed roughly in
terms of Buhler's first two functions - it can hardly be doubted
that religious discourse was in its origins often intended to be
descriptive and explanatory as well as expressive and stimulative, and that this remains true today. Moreover, the history
of religion is full of quite genuine and often rigorous arguments
about the truth of these explanations and descriptions.
This heritage is in danger of being lost today; religious
discourse is in danger of being reduced- as if this were a favour
to religion!- to the first two functions. Ironically, perhaps the
most serious. danger of this happening comes from the attempts
of theologians, no doubt just as well-intentioned as Braithwaite,
but misguided and even eccentric for all that, to defend religion.

32

I have already mentioned how the very coin of religious
discourse may be debased by excessive ambiguity of meanings.
It is worth mentioning another self-defeating strategy to which
the Buhler schema is particularly relevant.
·
Some theologians - Reinhold Niebuhr is an example - have
suggested that human logic is responsible for having led us into
difficulties in trying to comprehend and defend religious
doctrine, and have recommended that instead of trying to
reconcile seemingly contradictory doctrines we instead abandon
logic, together with its laws of non-contradiction and tertium
non datur. Now logic has a way of avenging herself on those who
treat her lightly.lfwe abandon logic, we lose the power of argument:
for argument consists, in essence, in showing that two claims
are incompatible. And if we abandon logic we also diminish
enormous?J our powers of description: for to say what something is,
to describe it, is at the same time to say a great deal about what
it is not. And if we allow contradictions to be introduced, we
permit all descriptions at once. Thus one defensive move - the
scuttling oflogic - forces us step by step down the hierarchy of
·linguistic functions. We lose the power to argue, we lose the
power to describe; we are left with the powers to express and
to signal. Such may be sufficient in poetry. It may be sufficient
in, say, music. There can be no doubt that the expressive and
stimulative functions of our various languages are by themselves
alone astonishingly rich and deep. But are they rich and deep
enough, do they suffice, for religion? Or do they debase and
emasculate it? Some persons, like myself, who sympathise with
the rich heritage of traditional Christianity even though we are
critical of it, would wish that more theologians could keep these
elementary linguistic considerations in mind during their
defences of religion. It is at least conceivable that their cures
are worse than the disease. Moreover, these cures are infectious
and may spread to areas other than religion. For example,
historical writing and political argument may be debased by
tactics similar to those used unintentionally to debase religious
discourse.
The ambiguities of language are great gifts - and great
dangers.

33

3 Morality and Religion in Conflict
Nothing can come of converting the question about duty and
right, about the moral subject, into the question about the
reality and practical possibilities of man as the object of our
thought - as if man himself as such were not called in
question by the consideration of what ought to be.
Karl Barth: The Word of God and the Word of Man
(p. 137)
I

Since we are concerned principally with the question of the
interdependence of morality and religion, we need not occupy
ourselves with the fourth case mentioned at the beginning of
this study: namely, that in which morality and religion are
fully compatible, but in which neither is reducible to the other.
In the fourth case morality and religion are consistent - and
independent.
Rather, we may proceed at once to the fifth case, in which
morality is not derivable from religion or vice versa; and where
the two conflict to at least some extent but not wholly. Of many
writings on such conflict, the most influential in recent years
have probably been those of S0ren Kierkegaard and Karl
Barth.
In turning to the thought of Kierkegaard we appear to be
leaving twentieth-century thought for the first time in this
study, and to be backtracking to the nineteenth century. The
appearance is, however, deceptive. Kierkegaard stood quite
apart from most religious writers of his own time and until his
thought suddenly became relevant - during the second decade
of the twentieth century - his influence was marginal. Chiefly
responsible for bringing Kierkegaard's thought to public notice
at this time were three writers: the Danish philosopher, Harald
Hoffding; the German, Theodor Haecker, whose work on
Kierkegaard (1913) influenced Karl Kraus and Martin Buber
in Vienna and certain members of the Brenner Kreis around
Ludwig von Ficker in Innsbruck; and most important, the
Swiss theologian Karl Barth. Here we can discuss only the

35

relationship between the thought and situations ofKierkegaard
and Barth.
II

In his book The Epistle to the Romans, first published in 1918 1 the book that made his reputation and is often credited with
having started the nco-orthodox movement in ProtestantismBarth quoted Kierkegaard generously; and for the following
eight years- until Kierkegaard's ideas began to be put to uses
of which Barth did not approve 2 - he made no secret of his
immense debt to him.
In Kierkegaard Barth found a natural predecessor and ally.
For Kierkegaard had already avoided in the 1840s the main
snare in which liberal Protestants found themselves caught by
the beginning of the World War; and he had taken the alternate
approach to theological questions which their main opponents
and successors, led by Barth, were to follow.
Kierkegaard's chief problem had been: 'What does it mean
to be a Christian?' The question had not only been asked
before; controversies over problems of defining the essence of
Christianity or of 'being a Christian' had troubled Christian
writers from the earliest days of the church. By Kierkegaard's
time, however, an impregnable answer to the question was
becoming increasingly urgent.
Only a generation before Kierkegaard reached maturity,
Immanuel Kant, after having given a shattering blow to
traditional theology and metaphysics, and an incisive critique
of the proofs for the existence of God, aligned himself with those
who located the essence of Christianity in its morality. By the
time Kierkegaard had begun to write, Protestant liberalism,
which was to be closely associated throughout its history with
neo-Kantianism, had fully emerged as an effort to show that
the essence of Christian doctrine, construed as its moral
teaching, harmonised with modern progressive cultural
thinking, and that nothing hence prevented a reasonable
modern man from affiliating himself with it. Here Protestant
liberalism followed a well-established tendency. Throughout
Protestant intellectual history it had been widely though not
consistently assumed that the results of independent scientific
36

inquiry would tally, when properly interpreted, with Protestant
teaching. The alliance was to be sure an on-again, off-again
affair, but sufficed to permit scientists and Protestant theologians to mount a common front against Roman Catholic
obscurantism on one hand and the fundamentalism of some of
the working-class Protestant sects on the other hand. In practice, the dominance of the scientific side of this alliance led to a
steady erosion of Protestant teaching. The importance of the
celebrated controversies over geological discoveries and Darwin
has been exaggerated. In fact, the more eminent Protestant
theologians discarded the Bible's cosmological and scientific
statements relatively painlessly. For by Darwin's time, they had
grown used to the idea of a refurbished Christianity, independent of many features of traditional Christianity, such as the
sort of natural theology that was dependent on those very proofs
for the existence of a deity which Kant and others had
discredited. All these, it was insisted, were transient, accidental
accretions on Christian doctrine: the essence ofJesus's teaching
was the Christian ethic, as exemplified in the Sermon on the
Mount.
Particularly important to this ethic, and especially relevant
to an understanding ofKierkegaard, is Kant's universalisability
principle, according to which an argument against an act such
as murder might go as follows: 'One ought not to do that, for if
everyone were to do that the results would be catastrophic.
Therefore no one should do that.' A reasonable moral objection
to a proposed act would, then, be that it could not be
universalised.
Many nineteenth-century Protestant theologians did work
within such a Kantian approach, particularly as it was
developed by followers of Hegel. Having shelved the various
biblical cosmologies and Aristotelian metaphysics, they argued
that a morality lay at the core of jesus's teaching. Accordingly,
much biblical criticism of this period was oriented towards
reconstructing the life of the historical Jesus so as to depict him
as a good, eminently reasonable, nineteenth-century Danish or
German liberal Lutheran bishop, after whose life one might
well pattern one's own. Could not the Sermon on the Mount,
with its injunction: 'Do unto others as ye would have them do
unto you', be read as a kind of anticipation of Kant's
universalisability principle? Hegel, for instance, appears to

37

have toyed with this idea in his early essay 'The Life of Jesus'
( 1795). Within an approach which took the historical Jesus as
a paradigm example of a good rational social manager or
reformer, liberal Protestant Christianity could be presented as a
most reasonable form of belief because interpretations of its
personal and social ethics (presumably based on those of Jesus)
seemed in harmony with the rationalist ethics of Kant, Hegel
and their followers.
Kierkegaard, standing apart from his contemporaries, wrote
scathing denunciations of this wordly 'ethical Christianity' and
the presumed marriage between rationalism and Protestantism
which he thought responsible for it. A recurring theme in his
writing is that Christendom lacks character. It is easy to be a
Christian: so-called Christians neither accept nor reject
Christianity seriously - and thus do not take it seriously. If
some tenet were attacked by reason, the tenet would be
rejected or reinterpreted. Reason marched forward conquering
new ground; Christendom followed dutifully after. If this were
to continue, Kierkegaard warned, Christianity stood in danger
of losing its claim to distinctiveness. In Fear and Trembling
Kierkegaard allows his pseudonymous author, Johannes de
Silentio, to comment that the Greeks could have done just as
much so far as ethics was concerned: no revelation, nothing
special was required. And for this reason, such a limited form of
Christianity stood in danger of losing its identity. Kierkegaard
thought that the picture of Jesus as a great practical moral
teacher- even if correct - would have been both insufficient
and inappropriate as a defence of Christianity. But what if it
were undermined by historical scholarship instead of reinforced by it?
What would be left? Kierkegaard's question was terribly
prescient. For by the first decade of the present century this
picture of the historicalJesus had come to grief.
Indeed, in the decade prior to the publication of Barth's
Epistle to the Romans the Protestant liberals suffered a most
extraordinary and ironical reverse. Although the liberals
themselves had sponsored the ambitious programme of biblical
exegesis conducted during the nineteenth century, and in
particular the 'quest for the historical Jesus', their own
historical researches proved to discredit their own image of the
historical Jesus. Jesus, it turned out, had not preached a liberal
ethical creed. Schweitzer and other biblical scholars argued that
38

when set in its historical context the Sermon on the Mount had
to be read as an interim ethic, not designed for a practical
politics of love but for a brief period between the crucifixion
and an imminent Lastjudgement.Jesus himself appeared to be
a forbidding, world-denying figure, hardly a nineteenthcentury-style social reformer with whom Protestants could
easily identify.
In brief, what had been called the Christian ethic by many
Christians during the nineteenth century was- just as Kierkegaard had warned - not Christian. The Christian ethic was no
more essential to Christianity than was the Christian cosmology.
To be sure, Kierkegaard himself rarely discussed nineteenthcentury, ethics-oriented biblical criticism directly; and from the
few comments he did make one can tell that he hardly anticipated all the results which Schweitzer records- not to mention
later twentieth-century research. Nonetheless, there are passages
in Fear and Trembling which are clearly meant to mock the
Leben Jesu of David Strauss, an important biblical scholar of
the nineteenth century. And in Training in Christianity and
The Philosophical Fragments, Kierkegaard clearly denies the
apologetic effectiveness of such historical research. 'History',
Kierkegaard writes, 'makes out Christ to be another than he
truly is.' Although Kierkegaard scoffed at the effectiveness of
such historical research, he had a picture of the historical Jesus
which differed sharply from that of the liberals.
Kierkegaard buttressed his attack on rational, ethics-centred
Christianity with a direct defence of the 'absurd'. Using the
familiar fideistic-sceptical arguments that one can find in
Sextus Empiricus, in Pascal or in Bayle, Kierkegaard emphasised
the essential incompleteness of any rationalistic system, for
example Hegel's. In his Concluding Unscientific Postscript, Philosophical Fragments, De Omnibus Dubitandum Est, Fear and Trembling,
Training in Christianity and elsewhere, he argued that rationality
is necessarily limited, that the correctness of any system or way
of life can never be proved. Any attempt to do so generates an
infinite regress of proving; and, so he argued, a dogmatic
presupposition is therefore necessary. To adopt any particular
way of life one has to make an irrational existential choice of
some 'absolute presupposition' or revelation. This act of choice
will not be determined by any 'rational criterion' - such as the
'universalisability principle'. In effect, Kierkegaard argued
39

that there is an excuse for irrationalism against which a rationalist has no defence, since it i~> valid from his own point of view.

III
And here we arrive at the way in which the conflict between
morality and religion is dramatised by Kierkegaard. If there is
indeed such a limit to rationality, why should God not countermand a reasonable ethic? For instance, God could even demand
murder through what Kierkegaard calls a 'teleological
suspension of the ethical'. This very possibility Kierkegaard
explores in Fear and Trembling, where Abraham demonstrates
his absurd faith in God first by believing, contrary to familiar
biological laws, that his wife Sarah would bear him a son in
her old age; and then by his readiness to kill his beloved son
Isaac at God's command in spite of the absurd violation of
reasonable ethics which such an act would involve.
·
Kierkegaard concentrated on the Abraham story for many
reasons. First, he probably knew that Kant had criticised
Abraham's behaviour as unreasonable in his The Quarrel
Amongst the Faculties (1798). Secondly, one might have expected
a Christian writer like Kierkegaard to have chosen Jesus as his
example of the man of faith. By contrast to many writers of his
time, Kierkegaard avoided, particularly in his earlier work,
pinning the essence of Christian action on the imitation of the
historical Jesus. To be a man of faith was for him to obey God
blindly, absurdly, without recourse to reason- one's model of
the man offaith being more Abraham than jesus.
This is not to say that Kierkegaard entirely avoided speaking
of the imitation of Christ. Especially in the tenth volume of the
Danish edition of Seren Kierkegaards Papirer, Kierkegaard does
write, rather vaguely, of the imitation of Christ, usually
stressing suffering, solitude, and renunciation of this world. This
may well have been due to Kierkegaard's eventual reconciliation to the fact that he was not to marry or have a conventional
career. But even in this later work Kierkegaard does not use
the imitation of Christ for an apologetic purpose, and he
elaborately qualifies his use of the word 'imitate'. Moreover,
his conception of a world-renouncing historical Jesus, although
erroneous in detail, is close to those of Schweitzer, Barth and
40

the neo-orthodox thinkers, and far removed from the liberal
portrait.

IV
Consequently - and this is the point - the investigations into
the character of the historical Jesus which eventually destroyed
the many liberal portraits of Jesus as a great practical moral
teacher hardly affected Kierkegaard's characterisation of the
essence of being a Christian. Kierkegaard, having avoided the
traps of late nineteenth-century theology and biblical scholarship• which eventually shattered Protestant liberalism, suddenly
became relevant, and loomed at the end of World War I as one
of the few significant Christian thinkers of the nineteenth
century who had not only not succumbed to Protestant
liberalism, but who had attacked it in its heyday. Kierkegaard's
appeal to the early Barth and his followers needs little further
explanation.

v
We have taken Kierkegaard as a striking example of a writer
who stresses not simply the existence of a conflict between
morality and religion but even the necessity for one. His
religious hero, Abraham, serves, within the J udeo-Christian
tradition, as a paradigm example of the man obedient to God.
When a conflict arises between his allegiance on the one hand
to the moral code- indeed to what is understood to be God's
own moral code, forbidding murder - and on the other hand to
religious commandment which stands in stark disagreement
with the moral code, the choice he must make is clear. In the
Old Testament the agony of that choice is plainly illustrated;
but just as plain is its inevitability. For Abraham there is an
'either/or'. Morality would bring him to one decision;
obedience to God would bring him to another. As the man of
faith he had to obey God.
Whatever Barth's later reservations about Kierkegaard or
his influence may have been, Barth remains the contemporary
41

theologian most emphatic in stressing the same difference
between - and possible conflict between - the Word of God
and the Word of Man. In his later years, surveying the growing
weakness of the Protestant churches, Barth wrote increasingly
of the solitude and isolation of the theologian. Yet if he ever
wavered in his own absolute commitment to what he called the
Word of God, he did not- unlike Tillich- parade his doubting.
'There is no justification for doubt itself,' he insisted. 'No one
should flirt with his unbelief or with his doubt. The theologian should only be sincerely ashamed of it.' 3 The italics are
Barth's.
Yet it is not the familiar irrationally committed neoCalvinist 'dogmatist' that I wish to emphasise here. I wish also
to recall a side of Barth that is almost never mentioned. In" fact,
he was one of the most brilliant strategists of theological survival
in the history of the Christian church. Far from being dogmatic
in the ordinary sense of that word, he was remarkably flexible,
a most rational irrationalist, one who was - reputation notwithstanding- not one whit more an irrationalist than, to pick
arbitrarily on two well-known rationalists, Sir Alfred Ayer or
Sir Karl Popper. And what makes it possible to say this of
Barth is precisely his treatment of what he saw as the inescapable necessity for commitment involving a choice between
morality and religion.
A man of regular habits, Barth listened to the music of
Mozart for one half-hour each morning. Writing of Mozart, he
characterised himself: 'This man was creative, even and
precisely while he was imitating. Verily, he did not only
imitate. From the beginning he moved freely within the frame
of the rules of the art of his time, and later more and more
freely. But he did not revolt against these rules, nor break them.
He sought and found his greatness in remaining himself
precisely while binding himself to these rules. One must see
both his freedom and his restraint, side by side, and seek his
singular quality behind this very 'riddle.' 4 Moving creatively
within the rules was the problem, and the riddle, of Barth's
own life.
His own solution to this riddle set the strategy for religious
defence and renewal within Protestantism from the early 1920s
until the late 1950s. The key to his solution is contained in two
insights: first, only one of the rules was after all fundamental:

42

namely, that the Christian theologian be committed to the
'Word of God', as revealed in Jesus; second, as a corollary, the
theologian ought not to commit himself to any particular
interpretation of the Word of God, to any particular cultural
morality or ideology; the church must not be permitted to
become a mere reflection of social and cultural conditions, and
it certainly was no servant of secular morality.
Since such talk often bewilders people, it may be helpful to
try to explain it by mapping these expressions approximately
into perfectly ordinary secular language. Take the case of the
natural scientist: he is presumably committed to the truth about
the natural world, but is not committed to the truth of any particular hypothesis about the nature of that natural world.
Substitute 'theologian' for 'natural scientist', 'Word of God'
for 'natural world', and 'interpretation' for 'hypothesis', and
you have the crux of Barth's position.
But what is this 'Word of God'? That is indeed the question.
Unlike the fundamentalists, Barth does not identify the Word
of God with the Bible. Rather, even the Bible is taken by him
to be one more interpretation or witness - a fallible witness - to
the revelatory historical event which it is assumed that it reports.
If this is so of the Bible, it is all the more so, in Barth's view, of
all other theological statements, such as those in the Creeds,
those made in sermons, those embodied in theological systems,
those of the traditions and councils of the church. All are to be
considered co11jectural, subject to constant revision and testing
against the Word of God itself. Thus the locus of religious
authority is removed from the documents and utterances of the
church to the historical event to which they purport to bear
witness.
If the Word of God is to be treated thus, the job of the
theologian is redefined accordingly. If by definition any
theologian is committed to the Word of God, argument on behalf
of it, e.g., traditional apologetic theology, is forbidden to him as
useless and irreverent. The task of the theologian is restricted
to: ( 1) description or exposition of the Word of God and (2)
criticism and testing of his own and other descriptions, past and
current. Thus argument, creative discussion and disagreement, about
the content of the Word of God is required, even to be expected.
Argument about the truth of the Word of God is however forbidden.
Thus Barth bound himself, and yet remained creative.
43

VI
Yet, to exclude argument about the truth of the Word of God
is to adopt a minimal but nonetheless absolute concession to
irrationalism: one that was indeed to form the basis for ncoorthodoxy. Asking not, 'What is the essence of Christianity?'
but 'What is essential to being a Christian?', Barth demanded
of Christians nothing more, or less, than absolute commitment
to the Word of God as revealed by Jesus. The required commitment proved, in Barth's exposition, to be vague in a rather
precise and quite convenient way. It was sufficiently vague to
allow a flexibility amongst Protestant theologians surpassing
even that of many of the old liberals. Never again was any
identification of Christian doctrine with a fixed cultural
viewpoint or ideology, whether liberal or Calvinist, to be
permitted. On the other hand, the limits of this flexibility were
defined, in that commitment to the Word of God was not itself
subject to reconsideration.
The flexibility of Barth's formula enabled the ecumenical
movement for union amongst Protestant churches to minimise
the importance of the denominations' differing interpretations
of Christian doctrine and to emphasise their common commitment to the Word of God. Since even the formula was open to
different interpretations, the resulting flexibility was wide. In
any case, Barth's formula was written into the constitutions of
the new ecumenical organisations as the price of admission; and
at the same time, by exacting this price, Protestants gained at
least the illusion of taking a new tough-minded line. Their
formula might indeed be so vague as to be virtually empty:
but it was not susceptible to erosion by the latest findings of
science or by cultural fads.
Moreover, Barth's emphasis on searching for the Word of God
propped psychologically the Protestants' sagging morale by
explaining the collapse of earlier statements about the true
essence of Christianity, and providing explicitly for the
possibility that even more radical revisions would take place
in the future.
Barth's formula was of course not without its own dangers,
ones with which he never satisfactorily dealt: if the character
of the Jesus or the Word of God to whom assent was required
was indefinite, and if such commitment was required no matter

44

what Jesus was and d,id, at best the subjective commitment
itself would be definite. Its object would be an 'I know not
what and I care not what' - perhaps a less than satisfactory
object of worship.

VII
In view of Barth's critique of Protestant liberalism and his
religious conservativism, one might expect him to have been
politically reactionary. On the contrary, he was a socialist, and
had once seriously contemplated devoting his life to the tradeunion movement. His politics, interestingly, vividly illustrates
his attitude towards the conflict between secular moralities,
ideologies and political powers on the one hand- and the Word
of God on the other.
A vociferous anti-Nazi, Barth was expelled by Hitler from
his chair in Bonn, and forced in 1935 to return to his native
Switzerland. By contrast, he never showed any particular
hostility to communist forms of totalitarianism, and even
refused - despite hundreds of indignant protests - to condemn
such acts as the Russian invasion of Hungary of 1956. He did,
however, sharply scold Western cold-war ideologists who
advocated that Christianity be championed as a spiritual
alternative to communism.
That Barth's political positions would arouse disagreement is
easy to understand; that they cause bewilderment is puzzling,
for Barth's politics are closely connected with his theological
position.
Barth never would have sympathised with Hitler, but one
rather doubts that Barth would have gained any notoriety as
an anti-Nazi had Hitler not attempted to interfere with the
doctrine of the Protestant churches in Germany. Indeed, had
Hitler left the churches to go their own ways, at least
doctrinally- had he not imposed his New Order on the Old
Religion - it is not inconceivable that Barth would have
behaved in a way which would have permitted him even to
retain his chair. But toying with the intellectual tradition of de
Lagarde, Langbehn and Moeller van den Bruck, Hitler
attempted for a time to use the churches as vehicles of a
'German-Christian' Nazi ideology. It was principally this
45

Nazi policy that Barth opposed, and for essentially the same
reasons that he opposed Protestant liberalism in 1918 and the
idea of the 'Christian West' after World War II. According to
Barth, it is contrary to the basic commitment of the theologian
to the Word of God to allow any cultural ideology or morality,
good or bad, to be incorporated into, or blended with, Christian
doctrine. Autonomous, Christianity stands alone, in judgement
on culture. The communists, unlike the Nazis, did not attempt
to commit this particular sin: frankly atheistic, they were ready
to destroy the churches if opportune but were rarely disposed
to create a 'Marxist Christianity'. Barth anticipated that
through skilful diplomacy and tact the churches could achieve
a viable 'live and let live' accommodation with the communists.
In this he may well have been politically nai've, but he was
utterly consistent - even if one may sense a kind of madness
about that very consistent order of priorities.

VIII
However rational and consistent Barth may have been, it
remains true that he was at heart an irrationalist: he was
committed dogmatically to the assumption that revelation
occurred, that the Word of God had been given to man through
Jesus, that the Bible was a testimony and report of this Word of
God. Yet, as mentioned above, even here Barth was no more
of an irrationalist - even if his irrationality was of a different
sort- than are many well-known contemporary rationalists. I
mentioned Ayer and Popper above, and will support my
statement briefly here, not to defend Barth or to criticise Ayer
or Popper, but to indicate the continuing importance of the
problem of rationality.
I mentioned above, when discussing Kierkegaard, that way
of thinking, sometimes called fideism, sometimes scepticism,
that maintains that everyone must - for logical reasons - make
an irrational commitment to his basic principles. To attempt to
justify or to apologise for them leads, it is said, to logical
paradox. Presumably Barth dropped Kierkegaard in the mid
1920s at least in part because of the enthusiasm with which his
fideistic arguments for commitment and the absurd were taken
up by thinkers whose attitudes to Christianity sharply opposed
46

those of Barth. Fideistic arguments for irrational commitment
had had historically, and have continued to have during this
century, something like a boomerang effect. By providing an
excuse for irrational commitment, the argument that rationality
is ultimately limited may indeed enable a Protestant to make an
absurd commitment without losing intellectual integrity. But
if it does so then it does the same for any other commitments
whatsoever.
Moreover, anyone who makes use of this excuse may not,
with integrity, criticise the holder of a different commitment- a
commitment not to Christ but to the Fatherland right or wrong,
to the class struggle, or to just about anything else. One gains
the right to be irrational oneself at the expense of losing the
right to criticise anyone else for acting absurdly. One gains
immunity from criticism for one's own commitment by making
any criticism of alternative commitments trivially easy. One
quickly reaches what R. H. Popkin, in a study of Kierkegaard,
aptly described as an 'anarchy of private individual faiths that
cannot be discussed or communicated'. This aspect of Kierkegaard's thought would ironically even give aid and comfort to
the neo-liberal subjective ethical Christianity ofBraithwaite!
To deal with such difficulties, various thinkers of a stripe
quite different from that of Kierkegaard have taken various
routes. Popper, for one, proposed to adopt a 'minimum concession to irrationalism'. Characterising himself as a 'critical
rationalist', Popper wrote that 'whoever adopts the rationalist
attitude does so because he has adopted, without reasoning,
some proposal or decision, or belief, or habit, or behavior, which
therefore in its turn must be called irrational. Whatever it may
be, we can describe it as an irrational faith in reason ... the
fundamental rationalist attitude is based upon an irrational
decision, or upon faith in reason. Accordingly, our choice is
open. We are free to choose some form of irrationalism, even
some radical or comprehensive form. But we are also free to
choose a critical form of rationalism, one which frankly admits
its limitations, and its basis in an irrational decision (and to that
extent, a certain priority of irrationalism) .' 5
In The Problem of Knowledge (1965), Ayer also argues
himself into an irrational commitment. There he calmly asserts
that our standards of rationality need no rational justification
because any such standard 'could be irrational only if there
47

were a standard of rationality which it failed to meet; whereas
in fact it goes to set the standard: arguments are judged to be
rational or irrational by reference to it'. This is a monumental
begging of the question, a logical howler which only someone
with the acumen of an Ayer could make so elegantly and
nonchalantly. Of course, if some particular standards and
procedures of rationality, such as Ayer's, are the correct ones,
then there can exist no other rational standards which are also
correct but which can nevertheless invalidate the former as
irrational. This 'if', however, marks a great assumption: for
this is precisely what is at issue - and something that Barth would
have challenged. Structurally speaking, Ayer's position is
identical with that of Barth. Barth argued that apologetic
defence or assessment of theology was to be outlawed since the
Word of God is itself the standard or criterion which any such
assessment would have to use- surely an assumption that Ayer
would challenge. Both Ayer and Barth abandon apologetics, the
sort of procedure which in theology tries to justify commitment
rationally, and replace it with kerygmatics, which is devoted to
the exposition and description of the fundamental message.
Unable to justify his basic position, the logical empiricist, like
the neo-orthodox theologian, begins to describe it. While Barth
begs the question ofthe existence and righteousness of God and
his Word, Ayer begs the question of the legitimacy of scientific
induction.
Whoever then wishes to condemn Karl Barth for his stubborn
Christian dogmatism in an 'era of scientific enlightenment'
ought first to ask whether he himself can escape the quandaries
of irrationalism and dogmatism into which even ardent
rationalists like Popper and Ayer have been led. I believe that
there is an escape, 6 but that it lies in a reconsideration of our
entire theory of rationality, a theory that is sadly neglected by
theologian and philosopher alike, and which is indeed probably
the most basic source of conflict between morality and religion
-or, for that matter, between one morality and another.

48

4 The Inseparability of Morality and
Religion
How each one of us, once we saunter past
The first redemptions of inconstant life,
Repeat, repeat, repeat
The same dead measure
And the same dead beat,
Open identical doors on identical death
And feel ashamed of everyone we meet.
David Stacton1

I
The title of this study is 'Morality and Religion', and we have,
to be sure, discussed in the preceding three chapters the questions
most often discussed in treatises on this subject. But a lingering,
perhaps one should say 'haunting', question remains: namely,
have we really said very much about morality and religion? We
have talked rather freely of 'morality' and of 'religion', but
what we have really most frequently referred to are moral
codes and religious codes. What is a code? If we consult the
dictionary, we find that a code is a systematic collection of
statutes, body oflaws so arranged as to avoid inconsistency and
overlapping, set of rules on any subject, prevalent morality of a
society or class, and so on. There are obviously not only moral
and religious codes, but codes of all sorts: grammatical codes,
legal codes, building codes, highway codes, codes of etiquette,
codes of table behaviour, codes for letter-writing. I suppose that
most people would say that although there are differences of
differing degrees of importance amongst all these codes, there
are also family resemblances in Wittgenstein's sense. Many
people would add to this that it would be easy to give a rough
ordering in respect of importance to the various sorts of codes I
have mentioned. Religious codes would be most important;
moral codes would be next,~ followed by legal codes. Such
things as codes for good letter-writing would come near the
bottom of most lists, and the others mentioned would presum-

49

ably come somewhere in the middle. So it might seem. But
here, as often, appearances are deceptive.
To give some examples: I have met persons who would have
been only irritated to learn that I had dipped into their supply
of letter-paper whilst a house guest but who would have
stricken my name from the guest list had my bread-and-butter
note begun 'Dear Joe', and ended 'Yours faithfully'. It is not
even clear that such cases are cases of morality. The offended
host might comment: 'ought' has nothing whatever to do with
it; one just does not (unless, perhaps, one is a bishop or clergyman) sign a letter: 'Yours faithfully' unless one has begun it
with 'Dear Sir'! But this too needs· qualifYing. If 'one' is an
Englishman, one does not do such things. But if one is an
American, one might conceivably write one's British host,
beginning 'Dear Brittanic Lordship', and concluding 'Cordially
yours', and get very high marks from one's host: Americans
have, after all, been known to commit yet greater gaffes. Of
course the degree of obligation attached to learning codes of
various countries and classes one may be visiting will vary
enormously depending on circumstances. An American who
drove on the right-hand side of the road in Britain would
during most of this century have been thought to be violating
not only the legal but also the moral code.
Such examples could be spelt out at some length: we could
talk about persons who would lie, murder, rape and steal with
less hesitation than they would sip port from a claret glass.
And so on. But what is the point of all this?
There is no single point to be made. What needs calling to
attention is the plain fact that many different codes govern
different kinds of behaviour in which we may engage; that we
are all at the same time following and failing to follow a number
of different codes: whilst pouring the claret into the claret glass
with one hand, I may be pocketing the host's silver with the
other. More important, the degree of the emotion or the extent
of the sanction applied to the breaking of some rule may have
nothing to do with its place on our tentative pecking order. An
immoral act may be shrugged off; an illegal act may be
applauded; and a mild socialfaux pas regarded as unforgivable
- all by the same persons. What is gauche may be thought far
worse than what is wicked.
Yet to what profit would we deliberate whether Miss Emily

50

Post's book of etiquette contains moral codes or whether the
codes contained therein are of some other character? Or to
what purpose would we go searching the Pentateuch to sort out
the religious code from the moral code from the eating code
from the code of table manners? Probably to no purpose
whatever - which leads one to doubt that it is important in
most circumstances to distinguish except in the roughest way
amongst the various codes that govern our behaviour. In the
Pentateuch - and for that matter in Emily Post - we have
woven together, in a rather intricate way, broad patterns of
behaviour, patterns in which it is hardly possible or important
to sort out, say, the religious elements from the moral.
The various sortings out that have been undertaken by
philosophers and theologians, and to which I have referred in the
preceding chapters, gained their importance, such as it was,
from quite partisan goals. For example, were it possible to show
that morality was indefensible without the endorsement of a
god, that would provide some apologetic support for various
beleaguered religions - from Plato's time to our own. And thus
our attention to the 'Euthyphro Argument'. Or could it have
been shown, as the Protestant liberals attempted for a time to
do, that the Christian ethic was the most reasonable moral
code, Christianity could have gained great strength at a time
when it was under attack. In such partisan contexts, distinctions between morality and religion, and between moral
and religious codes, may be important.
If one takes a broader view, however, I am inclined to think
that these distinctions not only lose in importance, but can also
become perniciously misleading. For this reason I have chosen
to write in this closing chapter of 'The Inseparability of
Morality and Religion'. First, however, I wish to state bluntly
my over-all opinion of the possibility of moral action, an
opinion that will seem unclear and perhaps even shocking at
first, but which I hope will become both clearer and more
plausible as the discussion develops.
We have been discussing moral, religious and other codes.
Now it is conceivable- though actual instances must be rarethat some person would succeed in following all the rules of all
the codes of behaviour required of him or adopted by him religious, moral, legal, letter-writing, dinner-eating, buildingconstructing, and so on. A person who never makes the mistake
51

of breaking any rule whatsoever is at least imaginable. Those
who have followed the Is/Ought discussion in the first chapter
must allow that it remains an open question whether such a
person is acting morally. But I wish to go further. I am
convinced that such a person may well be one who never has
and who never will act morally. I hope that it is obvious that I
am using the words 'act morally' here in a special sense, though
not in as odd a sense as it might at first be thought.
Now if I think that our imaginary but nonetheless possible
perfect rule-follower may fail ever to act morally, it will surprise
no one if I say that I believe that for most people moral action
is virtually impossible. And if it is indeed true that 'ought'
implies 'can', I am thus committed to the disturbing conclusion
that for most people it isfalse that they ought to act morally. At most I
could say that they ought to try to act morally. Indeed, I would
say this, and confess in this connexion a personal allegiance to
the passage from Hesse which I took as a motto for this study:
'It is necessary to continually attempt the seemingly impossible.'
But this is a record of personal moral conviction, not a conclusion of analytical philosophising. Moreover, it is a normative
moral expression that would have to be examined on its merits,
and one too that would be rejected by some whose names have
appeared in this study - by Karl Barth for instance, who would
have rejected it as a species of 'moral titanism'. Karl Barth
clearly recognised that normative moral positions of the type
which I have just avowed were of a religious as well as a moral
character.
To suggest what my conviction might amount to, and to
distinguish it from a part of our philosophical tradition which I
feel compelled to reject, I must now consider-and will reject-a
most venerable and respectable distinction that British and
American moral philosophers have made between morality and
religion.

II
In his autobiography, Mr Leonard Woolf very forcibly protests
Lord Keynes's familiar account of the kind of influence G. E.
Moore had exerted over those who were later to become
members of the Bloomsbury Group. Writing in 1938 about his
early beliefs as an undergraduate at Cambridge, Keynes

52

maintained of himself and his companions: 'We accepted
Moore's religion ... and discarded his morals ... meaning by
'religion' one's attitude towards oneself and the ultimate and
by 'morals' one's attitude towards the outside world and the
intermediate.' 2 In Sowing, the first volume of his memoirs,
Woolf calls this a 'distorted picture', stressing that he himself,
Moore and their companions at Cambridge were all quite
concerned about practical politics and public morality. 3
If one examines the lives and records of those extraordinary
individuals who belonged to the Cambridge and Bloomsbury
Group, one is inclined to think that Keynes did indeed paint a
rather romantic picture of their early"days in Cambridge, and
that Woolf's recollections are nearer to the truth. One's
suspicion that Keynes's recollections are somewhat distorted is
reinforced by Mr Michael Holroyd's recent biography of
Lytton Strachey. 4 But it is not with such historical questions
that I wish to deal here.
Rather, I should like to call attention to a point on which
Keynes and Woolf appear to be agreed. Both maintain a
distinction between one's religion - which is said to concern
one's own inner states and one's attitude towards the ultimateand one's morals - which are said to be directed towards the
outside world and what Keynes calls the 'intermediate', which,
amongst other things, are those things which are less than
ultimate. This distinction has a venerable heritage in British
philosophy, and it is still very much alive today. Interestingly,
John Stuart Mill used a distinction very much like this to define
his differences with the philosophy of Jeremy Bentham. In
effect, Mill accused Bentham of leaving out of his account of
human nature those things which Keynes brackets as religious.
Bentham's general conception of human nature and life, Mill
wrote:
furnished him with an unusually slender stock of premises ...
[he wantonly dismissed as] 'vague generalities' the whole
unanalysed experience of the human race ... the faculty by
which one mind ... throws itself into the feelings [of a mind
different from itself] was denied him by his deficiency of
Imagination. Self-consciousness, that daemon of ... men of
genius ... never was awakened in him ... he had never been
made alive to the unseen influences which were acting on
c

53

himself ... his recognition does not extend to the more
complex forms of [sympathy] - the love of loving ... or of
objects of admiration and reverence. . . . Man is never
recognized by him as a being capable ... of desiring, for its
own sake, the conformity of his own character to his standard
of excellence, without hope of good or fear of evil from other
source than his own inward consciousness .... The sense of
honour and personal dignity ... the love of beauty, the
passion of the artist.... None of these powerful constituents
of human nature [so Mill concludes] are thought worthy of a
place among the Springs of Action. 6
Although Mill did not use the words 'religion' and 'morals' to
define this difference, any more than Moore himself did, it is
clear that Mill was accusing his mentor of having concentrated
his attention qn those things which Keynes was later to dub
the 'moral aspects' of Moore's philosophy at the expense of
what Keynes called the 'religious aspects', at the expense of
those things, such as the love of beauty, and the development of
inward consciousness, of which Moore was to write so powerfully in the famous last chapter of Principia Ethica.
This distinction between religion and morals, or, crudely,
between the 'inner' and the 'outer' was, then, present in the
very different forms of utilitarianism championed by Bentham
and by Stuart Mill; it appears in the reaction to utilitarianism
represented by Moore and the Bloomsbury Group. And, as I
have suggested, it remains very much alive today- for example
in what has come to be called the philosophy of 'negative
utilitarianism' propounded by Popper. In the course of
developing a Popperian account of ethics, one of his disciples
has written categorically as follows: 'Morality should be
understood in an extraverted way as concerned with our
behaviour towards others. I draw a sharp distinction between a
man's morality and his personal religion and private ideals.' 6

III
This distinction between a man's behaviour towards others and
his personal religion and private ideals does not bear examination. I do not wish - as must be clear from the foregoing

54

chapters - to reduce morals to religion or religion to morals.
But I would maintain that these two, as defined by Keynes,
and also as they manifest themselves in most of the great
religions of the world, are so intertwined that an attempt to
carry through the distinction amounts to something like an
attempt to analyse the unanalysable. More important, and
more pertinent, it hinders understanding of the development of
either personal or social morality, understanding of the soul's
conquest of evil.
I may as well state several further prejudices. One is that a
far larger part of our behaviour towards other persons than we
are inclined to admit is a tangled web of guilt, fear, shame,
projection, exploitation, ignorance, lack of inner consciousness
and the other stuff of which evil and arbitrary behaviour is
compounded. Man, being in any case by nature a confused
animal, and alarmed by these virtually unmanageable forces
and states of being, erects various maxims, morals and wise
sayings - indeed, occasionally even codifying them - to help
him cope with his social environment. By and large he treats
these codes uncritically, dogmatically, as magic charms against
the unknown and unpredictable in himself and in his fellows.
Another prejudice is that we tend to ignore these facts, and the
complexities of interpretation that accompany them, and to
ignore them perhaps especially when constructing our moral
and ethical theories.
Although there may indeed be very little one can do about
the way people behave towards one another, occasionally a
few people can with some small measure of success embark on
an at least partial conquest of evil. There is no one route to this
conquest: the route may be sought, as in the Christian
traditions, in the quest for what is called salvation. It may be
sought, as for example in the philosophical psychology of C. G.
Jung, in the quest for individuation, whose goal is 'wholeness'.
It may be located, as many philosophers would prefer, in the
Socratic tradition of searching for self-knowledge. Whatever
the route, almost all such endeavours when successful involve
what can be called heightened self-awareness, including some
awareness of the evil of which one is capable - a subject to
which I shall return. These quests are by and large inner; there
is nothing 'unenlightened' about calling them religious. And
without such inner quests, any so-called morality that may crop
C2
55

up in our external, outer behaviour is usually either conventional, coincidental or accidental. For our interpretation of our
external social situation is subject to distortion by our failures
in achieving a heightened inner self-awareness. This does not
imply that we ought to compose ourselves in meditation,
withdrawn from the social world, until some such time as we
feel able to cope with it in full self-awareness. For paradoxically,
our inner awareness develops as we reflect on the way in which
our psyches impinge on the outer world, indeed, as we learn to
differentiate between the I and the not-!.
IV
It would no doubt be helpful to analyse the meanings of various
of the words and concepts I have been employing. But even to
begin on this important and useful project would be to write
another, or at least a far longer, book. Fortunately, the line of
thought which I am pursuing is not utterly idiosyncratic, and
several contemporary writers have discussed with considerable
analytic penetration the philosophical issues involved in such a
course. I have in mind such work as the discussion between
R. W. Hepburn and Iris Murdoch on 'Vision and Choice in
Morality', and P. F. Strawson's essay on 'Social Morality and
Individual Ideal'. To these I refer my readers. 7
For my own immediate purposes it will suffice to treat these
themes in terms of some examples. I shall therefore draw on
some stories from the case-books of modern psychology. They
concern some adventures of a small boy whom we may call
Christopher. Both stories were recalled by Christopher himself
after he had become an adult, and were recounted in roughly
the following form.
The first episode occurs when Christopher was eight years
old, early in the first morning following the end of his Christmas
holiday. We find him lying slumbering in bed, sleeping late, as
he had. done on many of the mornings during the holiday.
Suddenly he is abruptly and painfully awakened: his mother
seizes his hair, yanks him out of bed, and spanks him. She had
been calling him repeatedly to rise, to wash and dress, and
prepare for school But he had not heard; he had slept on; he
was still on holiday. But not for long. Less than an hour later,
56

on the way to school, trudging through the snow with his little
sister, Mary, five years old, whom Christopher had to guide to
and from school each day, he begins to cross-examine her about
their mother. 'What do you feel about Mommy?' Christopher
asks repeatedly. 'Don't you really hate her?' Sister protests
her love of her mother; but Christopher is stubborn and
persuasive- and he promises not to tell. Eventually, as they
near school, Mary submits, and agrees that she really does hate
their mother. That evening, after returning home from school,
Christopher takes aside his mother to tell her: 'Mommy,
Mary told me today that she hates you.' And then mother
spanks Mary.
The second episode takes place about eighteen months later,
in the summer, when Christopher was nine years old. His
mother being devoutly religious, Christopher is sent regularly
to church and taught religion at home as well. But he is a
precocious lad and has already begun to doubt the stories of
God and Jesus. We find him sitting on the porch ofhis family's
house, in the warm summer evening, talking with his father.
'Daddy,' he asks, 'was there really a Jesus? Did all those
miracles really happen?' His father replies: 'Well, we don't
really know; they may have - but perhaps not.' Christopher
turns away almost immediately, goes inside to his mother, and
reports accusingly: 'Mommy, Daddy says there wasn't any
Jesus.' There followed an extraordinarily heated quarrel
between Christopher's parents, one which his father, as was
usual, lost.
We could hardly even begin to explore here the nuances
latent in the report of these two episodes. But it is obvious what
pattern is present in both these stories about a shockingly clever
wicked little good boy who had not the slightest idea what he
was doing, and yet at the same time in a sense may have known
very well what he was doing.
In the first episode Christopher had felt himself wrongly
punished - and quite possibly he was: mother perhaps ought
to have been particularly indulgent at the end of the school
holiday. But we do not know how things were with her:
perhaps she had been having a deserved holiday too. Christopher, at any rate, was furious. His fury expressed itself most
crudely, as hate for his mother - and perhaps for all things
feminine: his sister, the school, his teachers, his having to care

57

for his sister on the way to school. But Christopher also loved
his mother; and he knew from his teaching and from his
religious and moral training that one ought only to love one's
mother. He could not openly express his hostility towards his
mother, and yet he could not bear not to have it expressed. So
he virtually forced his little sister - only five years old and
hardly aware of what had happened - to express, to voice, the
evil sentiment. And then Christopher promptly saw to it that
the crime was punished: he tattled on his sister, and saw her
suffer the same punishment, spanking, that he had earlier
endured.
The behavioural pattern is the same in the second episode.
Christopher was unable or unwilling to express his forbidden
doubts about religious teachings; he probably suspected that
his father also harboured such doubts, for we are informed that
his father did not go to church very often; and so, in a 'man to
man' talk, he tricked his father into voicing the forbidden
doubts. And once again Christopher saw to it that the crime
was punished: his father was spanked verbally by his mother
and stalked off in despair to the neighbourhood pub - perhaps
thereby corroborating his wickedness in his son's eyes. In this
extraordinary way Christopher's religious doubts were laid
quietly, but oh so devilishly, to sleep, not to be yanked awake
again for nearly a decade, at which time he was thrust into a
severe neurosis.
If one is horrified by Christopher's behaviour, at the same
time one need not hide a certain admiration for the skilful way
in which he was able to manipulate his social environment. One
of the chief reasons for this, of course, was its predictability, in
particular the predictability of his mother. When we take a
closer look at his mother's predictability, we find that it
consists largely in her rigidity, her unconsciousness, her lack of
development- failures that were doubtless partly due to and
partly reinforced by the dogmatic moral maxims which she
virtually used as magic charms to deal with her own social
environment. Christopher appears to have been able to predict,
almost to the details, the sorts of actions she would take in
response to the information which he fed her. She did not
question his reports; she did not inquire how these issues Mary's suddenly voiced hate for her or her husband's religious
scepticism - had been raised. When her code appeared to have
58

been violated she did not pause to make inquiries; she sought
revenge. The life of his family appears to have revolved around
Christopher in a curious way. Christopher, one might think,
was a kind of vampire who cast a spell on the members of his
family, sucking their lifeblood to nourish his existence. Christopher used the members of his family, one after the other, to
commit the crimes he himself would like to have committed,
and then called on his mother to bring down God's wrath on
the criminals. But he could do this only because he knew that
his mother would not look at the situation, but would blindly
defend her moral magic. How the archetypes must have
howled: for morality by magic is self-defeating, sustaining
unconsciousness; putting nascent awareness to rest; spreading,
not dispelling, man's confusion.

v
Did Christopher do wrong? One may smile at the question;
and yet, what expression is one supposed to wear on one's face
when one discovers that there are two so-called 'schools of
thought' about such questions which predominate in our ethics
textbooks: one of them counselling us to examine motives; the
other, consequences? Whatever the school-philosophers might
say, I am inclined to doubt that we can give a very enlightening
answer to our question by looking at Christopher's motives or
intentions on the one hand, or by looking at the consequences
of his behaviour on the other. Take the question of consequences first. One could of course say that any behaviour that
led to Mary's being unjustly spanked was wrong. But to dismiss
the issue so easily is rather flippant. Apart from the fact that it
took the mother, as well as Christopher, to bring off the unjust
spanking, one might well wonder whether that spanking might
not have been one of the best things that ever happened to
Mary? Perhaps itjarred her into erecting some defences against
the 'loving brother' who may have guided her safely to school
each day, but who did not hesitate monstrously to misuse her
when it suited his purposes. We do not know.
We do know that Christopher himself later suffered from a
serious neurosis. But to say that even this was necessarily an
unfortunate consequence of his behaviour is to have made a
59

host of assumptions. Hardly any psychiatrist, at least on the
basis of the meagre evidence adduced here, would admit that
Christopher's neurosis - even if we accept that that neurosis
was unequivocably bad for him- was the direct effect of either
or both of these two episodes. It may have been, or it may not;
clearly there are many children who have gone through
experiences prima facie more damaging than these, and
emerged relatively unscathed. Similar remarks might be made
about any causal connexion that might be traced between these
actions of Christopher's and later unhappy relationships
between Christopher's father and mother, or his mother and
sister. It is evident that Christopher was already working within
a highly charged and neurotic situation which was by no
means his own creation.
One's perspective on this situation is not made much clearer
by abandoning an attempt to evaluate in terms of consequences,
an Erfolgungsethik or negative utilitarianism, and looking
instead, in the manner of the traditional Gesinnungsethiker, to
Christopher's 'motives' or 'intentions'. It is no news to those
interested in philosophy that the notions of motivation and
intention are filled with obscurity; but even if one overlooks
this fact, one may raise the question whether, whatever they
may mean, a satisfactory account of them must not presuppose
a degree of self-awareness which we have no reason to suppose
that Christopher possessed. In fact one might, if one did not
look too closely, defend both Christopher's motives and his
results in the second episode. In the moral universe then
inhabited by Christopher, to doubt religious teaching was
wrong, and to see that such doubts were punished was right.
So his motivation - and the immediate result he achieved could both be excused; some perhaps would even praise them.
But of course to say this is not to look very deep.
So let us try to probe somewhat deeper. We have implied
that a satisfactory account of motivation or intention - whether
good or bad- must presuppose a degree of self-awareness which
Christopher did not have. Christopher was of course a child. Is
this what is after all meant by saying that children are innocent?
One would not gather so from the literature about the 'lack of
innocence' of children which has been produced during the past
half-century. For in this, what has usually been stressed is their
lack ofinnocence in a very primitive sense ofthe word: we have

60

learned that children also inhabit the world of sex, that they are
very aware sexually, and to that extent are not the innocent
babes that some people once fancied them.
But perhaps our concept of innocence contains much richer
connotations; and we mean, or people meant, when we or they
speak or spoke of the innocence of children, that they behave,
they do not act; that they literally do not know what they are
doing. But to argue in this direction is to risk letting off everyone
as innocent - or rendering us all children. After all, did
Christopher's mother, who was no child, know what she was
doing? How much self-awareness did she enjoy? How much
self-awareness do most people enjoy? 'Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do', we read in the Gospels. I have
already indicated my own rather pessimistic attitude towards
such questions. Heinrich Zimmer was, I daresay, right when he
wrote: 'Guilt and innocence are rarely obvious. They are
unapparent, interwoven intimately with each other in a
marvellously convoluted design.' 8
Another example will help to make this clearer, an example
which I draw from an essay by Professor Donald MacKinnon. 9 Discussing various misuses to which the Christian
doctrine of redemption through sacrifice may be put, MacKinnon writes:
To sacrifice ourselves is, it is said, to realize the image of the
crucified, whereas the self-sacrificing may simply be mutilating himself, purposively destroying the sweetness of existence
in the name of illusion, in order to make himself a hero in his
own eyes.... Those who are familiar with the problems of
the care of old people will know very well what I call the
phenomenon of the 'human sacrifice', the daughter in a large
family who is described as 'devoted to her parents' (the
language has a ritual quality), and who is therefore chosen to
look after them in their decline. Not infrequently she is the
victim of various sorts of spiritual blackmail. Her patience
perhaps is exhausted by her mother's near senile cantankerousness and she is told 'you will be sorry one day, dear,
when I am dead and gone'; (and a discreet sob accompanies
the last words). She sees her life slipping from her and still
she is held in the vice-like grip, I will not say of dedication,
but of convention consecrated by the ecclesiastical image of
61

sacrifice. The ethic of sacrifice indeed provides a symbolism
under which all sorts of cruelties may be perpetrated, not so
much upon the weak as upon those who have been deceived
by a false image of goodness.
Just as, in the former examples, we asked whether Christopher did wrong, we might in this instance ask whether the
self-sacrificing daughter was doing right. Here again we have a
particular example of innocence, guilt, exploitation, projection,
all working together to the destruction or at least impoverishment of several human beings. 'Girls withering into ladies,'
G. B. Shaw's heroine remarks: 'ladies withering into old maids.
Nursing old women. Running errands for old men. Good for
nothing at last. Oh, you can't imagine the fiendish selfishness
of the old people and the maudlin sacrifice of the young.'

VI
I have indicated, by these examples drawn from intimate
personal relationships, my prejudice that neither an ethic of
motive nor an ethic of consequence is much help in judging
such relationships and the behaviour that occurs within them.
In doing so I do not wish to suggest that the various sorts of
motivational and utilitarian accounts of moral judgement are
useless - let alone to suggest that they have been authored with
malicious intent! Both are necessary; neither is sufficient; nor
are they sufficient when taken together.
Were I to attempt to gather together some of my own intuitions about these matters, I should have to say something
like the following. We can neither act morally nor evaluate with
much competence the actions of other persons without an
extraordinarily deep knowledge of ourselves and of our surroundings. Without such deep understanding we discriminate
only in the clumsiest way between good and bad consequence
or between good and bad intention. An important reason for
this is that we are much at the mercy of our projections that is, in the psychological sense, those interior states which
we impose on the external world in the course of interpreting
it.
In speaking of projection I do not wish to labour the obvious
62

or familiar, but if an example is needed one would be of the
shy man who, because of his own fears and hostilities and
aggressive feelings towards other persons, projects these feelings
onto certain of those other persons - even where the real
attitudes of those persons do not merit any such projection- and
assumes, or better, acts as if, these other persons harboured
aggressive and hostile feelings towards him. When such
psychological phenomena become systematised, as they do in
occasional individuals, such conditions as paranoia may
develop. But one need not adduce such unattractive states to
elucidate the notion of projection: 'falling in love' is one of those
rather more pleasant states of affairs where our projections may
take possession of us.
Consider again the problem of evaluating in terms of
consequences, in the light of what has just been said. It would
seem clear that a utilitarian ethic is wrong if only because our
actions have unintended consequences that cannot possibly
be predicted in advance. But even if this were not so, it is not
likely that much consensus could be achieved about which
consequences were unsatisfactory. Shaw wrote in the preface to
Major Barbara: 'It is exceedingly difficult to make people
realise that an evil is an evil.' 10 And indeed, some of the most
topical moral questions today stem from disagreement about
what is evil: about whether some purported consequence of a
particular moral or legal code is really unsatisfactory. Take the
public debates in Europe and America about capital punishment, about contraception, about the optimum size of families,
about homosexuality, about prostitution, about the use of
drugs. On the more controversial questions our feelings about
desirable and undesirable consequences, conditioned as they
are by projection, do not lead to agreement.
Which brings us back to the distinction advanced above by
such as Keynes between our personal ideals and our social
behaviour. Paradoxically, it might well turn out that a kind of
utopianism in personal morality or religion might be a necessary
condition for a satisfactory anti-utopianism in social life - so
intertwined are these two arenas of human behaviour. One
might, for instance, recall psychological and sociological
discussions of the high cost in anxiety and other ills persons pay
personally for the sublimation required individually to build a
civilised society, achieve some measure of rationality, and act

63

in terms of social decency and warmth. And still, in full awareness ofthis prospect ofsuffering, some may still prefer such an ideal.
Morality indeed cannot be restricted to our social behaviour.
For some psychological self-consciousness on the part of an
individual - which mqy be achieved only through his following
of some such personal ideal- is required if he is to have proper
sympathy for other persons, if he is to avoid such things as
projections in evaluating social situations and in not feeling
feelings of moral revulsion where such feelings are not due.
In the event of conflict between a man's 'morality' and his
'private ideals' (or religion) should either one or the other
always prevail? A certain stick-to-it-ivity regarding his
private ideals may at least sometimes be required if a man
is to evaluate particular social situations with the maximum of
objectivity.
If our interpretation of our social environment and its ills
then may be, and indeed usually is, severely distorted by our
internal states, how does one achieve an internal psychological
state, a relationship between consciousness and the unconscious, which does not precipitate a distorted view of the
social environment? The question just raised is hardly one I
can answer to anyone's satisfaction, including my own. There
are as many routes charted to this state of being as there are
psychologists, not to mention religious leaders. Nonetheless, one
can make a few remarks that are relevant. For one thing, as I
have already indicated in speaking of Keynes and Moore, these
internal quests might just as well be called religious. For another
thing, they are not exactly pleasant: they may involve great
stress and deep suffering. Even Freud, one of the apostles of
such self-awareness as may be achieved through psychoanalysis, occasionally wondered whether the whole process and civilisation into the bargain - was worth the effort. One of
the unpleasant things that are required ifsuch quests are to be
even moderately successful is a deep appreciation of the evil
of which one is capable - whether this is expressed as one's
'sinfulness', as it might be within the Christian tr adition, or as a
recognition of one's knavery, to speak in terms that could be
given an entirely pagan interpretation.
There is nothing novel about what has just been said. The
late C. G. Jung, for example, wrote as follows of the conquest
ofevil: 11
64

The individual who wishes to have an answer to the problem
of evil, as it is posed today, has need, first and foremost, of
self-knowledge, that is, the utmost possible knowledge of his
own wholeness. He must know relentlessly how much good he
can do, and what crimes he is capable of, and must beware of
regarding the one as real and the other as illusion. Both are
elements within his nature, and both are bound to come to
light in him, should he wish - as he ought - to live without
self-deception or self-delusion.
We have such advice not only from psychologists like Jung,
but also from our mythology and folklore. In Heinrich Zimmer's
collection of stories, The King and the Corpse, which I mentioned
earlier, one reads of legendary figures like Conn-eda, an
Irish prince, or, again, of the Hindu king after whom the
collection is named: two heroes who are distinguished - and
also imperilled - by their guilelessness and innocence, their
trustfulness, their lack of imagination for evil, which, paradoxically, put them at the mercy of the forces of evil. These figures,
like many hero figures oflegend and myth, must transform their
inner selves by going through perilous trials in which they are
initiated into evil- an initiation process which requires them to
doff, or sacrifice, their earlier personalities, to acquire a
penetrating knowledge of the dark as well as the light side of
things, a more penetrating knowledge of both inner and outer
'social life' as it really is, to die to their old selves and to be
'born anew', and thereby to become fitter to perform their
kingly tasks: 'to dispense justice as well as mercy'. 111 Only
then do they become capable of moral action.
The figures just mentioned are princely, heroic, strong, which
helps to confirm that the conquest of evil and the attainment of
the ability to act morally is rarely achieved by those who are
weak psychologically and intellectually. The weak may well do
things that are good; they rarely do good things. Nietzsche
wrote in Z,arathustra :13 'There is nobody from whom I
want beauty as much as from you who are powerful: let your
kindness be your final self-conquest. Of all evil I deem you
capable: therefore I want the good from you. Verily, I often
have laughed at the weaklings who thought themselves good
because they had no claws.'

65

VII
That Cambridge and Bloomsbury Group whose memories I
invoked at the beginning of this chapter were preoccupied with
the development of the interior life at the same time that they
were able to deal shrewdly with the outer world. And in the
course of their interior quests they did not preen themselves
only on the pretty. Was it not, after all, the Hogarth Press that
pioneered the translation and discussion of Freud in England?
Those associated with the group were also strong, whatever
their physical and psychological ailments may have been. Russell,
Moore, Keynes, Leonard and Virginia Woolf, Morgan Forster:
these persons transformed not only themselves and one another;
in our century they transformed logic and epistemology, ethics,
economics, publishing - and a part of the tradition of the
English novel into the bargain. They were capable of enormous
evil, and -knowing it- did considerable good. As those who
supped with them, or were reviewed by them, knew well, they
had claws. Yet perhaps the self-conquest that at least a few of
them attained - and which some weaker men mistook for
weakness - lay in the kindness and gentleness of which they
were capable, that which one finds perhaps best expressed in
the novels of Forster. Although these individuals were, then,
engaged in a conquest of evil, although they even were, one
might say, searching for salvation, it is well to remember that
they were hardly Christians: they often referred to themselves
as pagans. Indeed, it is not really very interesting to remark that
the epigraph of Howards End, 'Only connect', expresses a
profoundly un-Christian sentiment.

66

Notes

Chapter 1
1. Theodore Parker, 'The Transient and the Permanent in
Christianity', in Perry Miller (ed.), The Transcendentalists
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1950) pp. 259283.
2. Plato, Euthyphro, xii 10.
3. P. T. Geach, 'The Moral Law and the Law of God',
chapter 9 of God and the Soul (Routledge & Kegan Paul,
London, 1969).
4. One of the most insistent on this point has been Karl
Popper.
5. See 'JAMA' ccv 9 (26 Aug 1968) 28.
6. Ibid.
8. W. W. Bartley, III, 'Theories of Demarcation between
Science and Metaphysics', in Problems in the Philosophy of Science,
ed. I. Lakatos and A. E. Musgrave (North-Holland Publishing
Co., Amsterdam, 1968) pp. 40-119, esp. p. 48.

Chapter 2
1. Quentin Bell, Bloomsbur:_y (Basic Books, New York, 1968)

p. 28.

2. W. W. Bartley, III, The Retreat to Commitment (Knopf~
New York, 1962; Chatto fk Windus, London, 1964). See also
the extensively revised German translation, Flucht ins Engagement (Szczesny Verlag, Munich, 1964).
3. R. B. Braithwaite, 'An Empiricist's View of the Nature
of Religious Belief', in I. T. Ramsey (ed.), Christian Ethics and
Contemporary Philosophy (S.C.M. Press, London, 1966), or in
John Hick (ed.), The Existence of God (Macmillan, New York,
1964). The study was first printed separately by the Cam67

bridge University Press as the Eddington Memorial Lecture
for 1955.
4. The neologism is Braithwaite's idiosyncratic way of
rendering the Greek dya117J into English as an adjective.
5. Braithwaite, in Christian Ethics and Contemporary Philosoplry,
p. 68.
6. These discussions, together with Braithwaite's reply, are
reprinted ibid.
7. John Macquarrie, Twentieth-Century Religious Thought
(S.C.M. Press, London, 1963) p. 312.
8. Ibid., p. 316.
9. Renford Bambrough, Reason, Truth and God (Methuen
& Co., London, 1969) p. 74.
10. Ved Mehta, The ]\lew Theologian (Harper & Row,
New York, 1965) p. 70.
11. Albert Schweitzer, The Q.uest ofthe Historical Jesus.
12. See my discussions of Barth in The Retreat to Commitment,
but more especially in my 'Rationality versus the Theory of
Rationality', in M. Bunge (ed.), The Critical Approach to Science
and Philosophy (Free Press, New York, 1964).
13. The I Ching, or Book of Changes, the Richard Wilhelm
translation rendered into English by Cary F. Baynes (Princeton
University Press, 1968).
14. Heinrich Zimmer, The King and the Corpse (Meridian
Books, New York, 1960).
15. David Stacton, Kaliyuga (Faber & Faber, London, 1965).
16. Karl Buhler, Sprachtheorie: Die Darstellungsfunktion der
Sprache (Gustav Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, 1965).
17. This was added by Buhler's student, K. R. Popper. See
Popper, Conjectures and Refutations (Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1962) pp. 134 and 295. See also, on the relations
between Popper and Buhler, the following: W. W. Bartley, III,
'Sprach- und Wissenschaftstheorie als Werkzeuge einer Schulreform: Wittgenstein und Popper als osterreichische Schullehrer', in Conceptus (Munich and lnnsbruck, April 1969); W.
W. Bartley, III, 'Theory ofLanguage and Philosophy of Science
as Instruments of Educational Reform: Wittgenstein and
Popper as Austrian Schoolteachers', forthcoming in Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, ed. R. Cohen and Marx
Wartofsky; and W. W. Bartley, III, 'Die osterreichische
Schulreform als die Wiege der modernen Philosophic', in
68

Club Voltaire: Jahrbuch fur Kritische Aujkliirung, vol. iv (Rowohlt
Verlag, Hamburg, 1970).
18. Buhler, Sprachtheorie, p. 28.
Chapter 3
1. Karl Barth, The Epistle to the Romans, translation from the
sixth edition, including author's preface to the English edition
and prefaces to the first through sixth editions (Oxford University Press, 1968).
2. Around 1927 Barth abruptly dropped Kierkegaard: in
his enormous twelve-volume Church Dogmatics Barth mentions
Kierkegaard about twenty times, often in small type and in
passing, and usually to criticise one or other of his minor ideas.
In a brief autobiography which appeared in 1945, Barth does
not even list Kierkegaard amongst those thinkers who shaped
his doctrinal standpoint; and in Die Protestantische Theologie im
19. Jahrhundert (1947), published in abridged form in English
as Protestant Thought from Rousseau to Ritschl, Barth mentions
Kierkegaard only three times. See my essay, 'Everybody's
Kierkegaard', in the .New York Review of Books, 28 April, 1966,
pp. 11-15.
3. Karl Barth, Evangelical Theology (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, New York, 1963) p. 131.
4. Karl Barth: 'Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart', in Religion and
Culture, ed. Walter Leibrecht (S.C.M. Press, London, 1959)
pp. 72-3.
5. K. R. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, chapter
24, first through third editions. For a similar statement by Popper,
see his paper 'Utopia and Violence', Hibbert Journal ( 1948).
In the fourth edition of The Open Society Popper began to
modify his position somewhat, but I do not believe that his
attempts to rectify his system have as yet been successful.
6. See my book The Retreat to Commitment, and also my
paper 'Rationality versus the Theory of Rationality', in The
Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy.

69

Chapter 4
1. Quoted by Frederic Spiegelberg, Lil1ing Religions of the
World (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1956) p. 129.
Stacton's poem is taken from an unpublished manuscript,
'The Death ofBosola'.
2. John Maynard Keynes, 'My Early Beliefs', in Two
Memoirs (New York, 1949) p. 82.
3. Leonard Woolf, Sowing: An Autobiography of the Years
1880-1904 (Hogarth Press, London, 1960) pp. 146 ff.
4. Michael Holroyd, Lytton Strach~y, vols i and ii (Heinemann, London, 1967-8).
5. John Stuart Mill, 'Bentham', in, for example, John
Stuart Mill, On Bentham and Coleridge, intro. F. R. Leavis (New
York, 1962), or in John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, ed. Mary
Warnock (London, 1962).
6. J. W. N. Watkins, 'Negative Utilitarianism', in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Sociery, suppl. vol. (1963) 96 ff.
7. These essays are reprinted in Christian Ethics and Contempora~y Philosophy.
8. Zimmer, The King and the Corpse, p. 224.
9. D. M. MacKinnon, 'Moral Objections', in Objections to
Christian Belief (London, 1963), esp. pp. 23 ff.
10. G. B. Shaw, Major Barbara (Dodd, Mead, New York,
1941).
11. C. G. Jung, .itfemories, Dreams, Reflections (Pantheon,
New York, 1961) p. 330.
12. Zimmer, The King and the Corpse, p. 42.
13. Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake ,(,arathustra, in the
chapter 'On Those Who Are Sublime'. See also Walter Kaufmann's discussion in The Owl and the Nightingale (Faber &
Faber, London, .1959). Parts of sections II through VI of the
present chapter are drawn from my es.~ay 'The Soul's Conquest
of Evil, in Talk oJGod, ed. G. N. A. Vesey (Macmillan, London,
1969).

70

Bibliography

Chapter 1
Plato, Euthyphro.
Kurt Baier, The Moral Point of View (Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, N.Y., 1958).
W. W. Bartley, III, 'Theories of Demarcation between Science
and Metaphysics', in I. Lakatos and A. E. Musgrave (eds),
Problems in the Philosophy of Science (North-Holland Publishing
Co., Amsterdam, 1968).
Philippa Foot (ed.), Theories of Ethics (Oxford University Press,
1967).
W. D. Hudson (ed.), The Is-Ought Question (Macmillan,
London, 1969).
G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica (Cambridge University Press,
1954).

Chapter 2
Renford Bambrough, Reason, Truth and God (Methuen, London,
1969).
W. W. Bartley, III, 'Rationality versus the Theory of
Rationality', in M. Bunge (ed.), The Critical Approach to
Science and Philosophy (Free Press, New York, 1964).
W. W. Bartley, III, The Retreat to Commitment (Knopf, New
York, 1962; Chatto & Wind us, London, 1964).
R. B. Braithwaite, An Empiricist's View of the Nature of Religious
Belief, The Eddington Memorial Lecture (Cambridge
University Press, 1955).
Karl Buhler, Ausdruckstheorie: Das System an der Geschichte
aufge;;.eigt, second, unaltered edition, with a foreword by
Albert Wellek (Gustav Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, 1968).
Karl Buhler, Sprachtheorie: Die Darstellungsfunktion der Sprache,
71

second, unaltered edition, with a foreword by Friedrich
Kainz (Gustav Fischer Verlag, Stuttgart, 1965).
John Hick, Evil and the God of Love (Macmillan, London, 1966).
Albert Schweitzer, The Q.uest of the Historical Jesus (Black,
London, 1910).
David Stacton, Kal~yuga (Faber & Faber, London, 1965).
David Stacton, Segaki (Faber & Faber, London, 1958).

Chapter 3
Sir Alfred Ayer, The Problem of /Cnowledge (Penguin, London,
1956).
Karl Barth, his writings; in particular, those referred to in the
text of this study.
W. W. Bartley, III, 'Everybody's Kierkegaard', in New York
Review of Books, 28 April, 1966, pp. 11-15.
W. W. Bartley, III, 'Karl Barth: "The Last of the Protestants"',
in Encounter (March 1970).
S0ren Kierkegaard: his writings, of which there are many
editions. Consult Robert Bretall (ed.), A Kierkegaard
Anthology (Princeton University Press, 1951).
Sir Karl Popper, The Open Socie~ and Its Enemies (Routledge &
Kegan Paul, London, first through third editiom.).

Chapter 4
C. G.Jung, Answer to Job (Meridian Books, New York, 1960).
D. M. MacKinnon, A Study in Ethical Theory (Collier Books,
New York, 1962).
Erich Neumann, The Origins and History of Consciousness, vols i
andii (HarperTorchbook,NewYork, 1962).
I. T. Ramsey (ed.), Christian Ethics and Contemporary Philosophy
(S.C.M. Press, London, 1966).

72

