W. W. BARTLEY, III

s

1•

',

-;

()

THEORY OF LANGUAGE AND PHILOSOPHY
OF SCIENCE AS INSTRUMENTS OF
EDUCATIONAL REFORM: WITTGENSTEIN AND
POPPER AS AUSTRIAN SCHOOLTEACHERS
For the most part an experiment about essentials will not occur to anybody unless a
good problem leads to it. And a problem
arises in a theoretical context. Moreover,
just why should we have merely facts, not
theories and explanations?
Wolfgang Köhler1

When we begin to study the immediate historical background of contemporary philosophy we encounter a curious fact: one of the most important parts of this background is precisely the disappearance of this
background from our field of vision.
II

No one needs to be reminded that several English and American writers
- Bertrand Russell above all - influenced the philosophical and scientific
movements of Vienna, Prague and Berlin between the wars. Yet many
ideas and developments closely associated with these movements - for
example, Wittgenstein's early and, even more so, his later thought, and
Popper's theories of induction and demarcation - were developed in soil
foreign to English and American philosophy, and under the influence of
German and Austrian thinkers whose names and views are unfamiliar
to the majority of English-speaking philosophers.
That this background should have disappeared from our historical perspective is itself a most intriguing fact, one that cries for explanation.
Such an explanation cannot be given in the present paper, which is intended only to suggest the extent of our ignorance about these matters,
and to indicate some of the corners and bypaths of 20th century philosophy into which we should have to look if we were to begin properly to
understand ourselves. For it is doubtful that the thought of, say, Witt-

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, XIV. All rights reserved.

5

3O

w.

W.t

SLLD1,

genstein, Popper, or the members of the Vienna Circle can be properly
understood or appreciated without better knowledge of the social and
intellectual milieu in which it was developed. Moreover, this hidden background is well worth studying for its own sake, since it is an important
part of one of the most fertile and exciting periods which any culture has
enjoyed.2 If this essay will, then, do no more than probe a few small parts
of a rich terrain, I nonetheless hope that my remarks will stimulate others
to begin to view the ideas of our contemporary philosophical heroes in
a somewhat broader context than is usual.
The topics which I have chosen to discuss are: (1) the once famous but
now virtually forgotten school reform movement which was developed
in Austria by Otto Glöckel immediately following the collapse of the
dual monarchy and which managed to survive until the Doilfuss dictatorship of 1934; (2) the psychological school whose ideas undergirded this
school reform: namely, Bühlerian child psychology, a critical version of
Gestalt psychology, difficult to classify precisely, but perhaps closer to
the thought of Piaget than to that of Wertheimer, Koffka, Köhler, or
Kurt Lewin; (3) the personal participation in this movement by Ludwig
Wittgenstein and Karl Popper; (4) the development of Wittgenstein's
thought construed as that of an amateur child psychologist turning partly as the result of his experience in schoolteaching at this particular
time - from an essentially associationist psychology to a configurationism
or contextualism close to that of the Gestaltists; (5) the thought of Popper
viewed as that of one chiefly a schoolteacher and neo-Kantian Gestalt
psychologist, a man far removed from the essential ideas of logical positivism, who virtually stumbled into his relationship with the Vienna Circle
and the consequent development of his hobby - namely, the philosophy
of science - on which his reputation came to rest but which cannot properly be understood without some knowledge of his earlier research interests
and permanent anti-positivist outlook; (6) the thought of the later
Wittgenstein and the early Popper viewed as far more closely linked in
spirit one to the other than to that of the Viennese positivists whom they
influenced.
III

We should begin with an account of Austrian school reform, for the role
it played is crucial. The character of the debate over the Austrian school

system, and some of its implications for both philosophy and psychology,
are reflected in the title of a pamplhet which Otto Glöckel published in
1928: Drillschule, Lernschule, Arbeitsschule (or Drill School, Learning
School, Working School). The year 1928 was a rather late date in the
debate about these various kinds of schools; in fact, the debate began
long before Glöckel's own birthdate in 1874. For many decades, even
under the Habsburgs, the Austrians had enjoyed one of the most progressive school systems in Europe. Yet, however well the pre-war Austrian
system may have compared with that of other European countries, it
was hardly a paradigm of progressive thinking: instruction, largely in the
hands of the Roman Catholic Church, was mechanical and as uniform
as was practical. As Count Rottenhan, royal advisor, defined its
aims, the purpose of the lower schools was "to make thoroughly pious,
good, tractable, and industrious men of the laboring classes of the people."
The constitution of the common schools issued by the emperor in 1805
was unequivocal: "The method of instruction" it decreed, "must endeavor
first and foremost to train the memory; then, however, according to the
pressure of the circumstances, the intellect and the heart. The trivial
schools will strictly refrain from any explanations other than those exactly
prescribed in the 'school and method book'..."3 If any educational psychology lay behind this approach, it was a version of associationism
like that propounded by Johann Friedrich Herbart (1776-1841). After
the revolution of 1848 most chairs of philosophy in Austria were filled by
followers of Herbart,4 who viewed the human mind as neutral and passive,
lacking innate faculties for producing ideas. The theory of the human
mind, as presented by Herbart, rather resembles what Popper in his early
article, 'Die Gedächtnispfiege unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Selbsttätigkeit',5 was to describe as 'the bucket or tub theory of the mind', an expression that Popper was often to repeat in his later work. According to
such theories, ideas themselves might be active; but they lead their lives
in passive storehouse minds. To a Herbartian, whose aim above all is
moral education, teaching consists in feeding students those ideas which
it has been decided should dominate their lives. At no time, according to
Herbart, should a teacher debate with his students on any matter. As he
explained in his Outlines of Educational Doctrine: "Cases may arise when
the impetuosity of the pupil challenges the teacher to a kind of combat.
Rather than accept such a challenge, he will usually find it sufficient

w. w. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

at first to reprove calmly, to look on quietly, to wait until fatigue sets
in"6

questionable depth. More important, particularly for philosophy and psychology, were certain other changes - in particular, the systematic effort
to undermine the very methodology of the Drillschule and Lernschule.
Take spelling for example. Prior to 1919, the rules of spelling had been
dictated, written on the blackboard perhaps, and then force-fed to students. After the school reform, various experiments were tried - under the
general rubric of 'Self-Activity' or 'Selbsttätigkeit' - to encourage youngsters to figure out rules for themselves (with little help from the teacher)
through the use of word-lists. I believe it likely that the second and final
book that Wittgenstein published during his lifetime: namely, his Wdrterbuch für Volksschulen, published as an official school text in 1926, was
intended in part for this purpose. (Wittgenstein also had other purposes,
not relevant here, though perhaps relevant to his philosophy: for example,
the elimination of words of foreign origin, and the attempt to teach proper
syntax through shrewd exploitation of dialect.) Possibly my suggestion
here may prove helpful to those who have been bewildered to learn that
a man of Wittgenstein's stature should have published a list of words,
and who appear reluctant even to include this book in his bibliography.
Another significant reform experiment was dubbed 'integrated instruction'. Although this experiment, like the entire school reform programme,
was later described as a Jewish concept, the word 'integration' has no racial
or ethnic connotations here. It refers to an effort to allow individual
teachers the latitude to determine how and when they would turn from
one subject to another during the school day. No reading or spelling
period as such, for example, was to be set aside. Although general goals
were indicated, the interest of the children was supposed to determine
how the day would be divided. Here again the implicit attack on the
various associationist psychologies, with their emphases on 'unit ideas',
is evident. That approach, so the school reformers believed, had led to
an exaggeratedly compartmentalized and 'atomistic' approach to teaching and learning. As I shall explain below, this very practice of integrated
instruction proves important in explaining certain episodes in Wittgenstein's life during the twenties.
Such experiments help explain the general name - so difficult to translate into English - that was given to the new type of school: namely,
'Arbeitsschule'. The word 'Arbeit', or 'work', referred not simply to the
manual training and crafts taught but more importantly, in the context

310

It was such a doctrine, such schools - Drillschule and Lernschule - and
such a school system, that Otto Glöckel (8 February 1874-23 July 1935),
not to mention his perhaps somewhat better-known subordinates, Ludwig Wittgenstein and Karl Popper, was to combat. Before turning to
Wittgenstein and Popper, a word need be said of Glöckel. Himself the
son of a public schoolteacher, Glöckel in effect made his entry into the
school reform movement by being dismissed from his teaching post due
to his political activities. This act, the work of Karl Lueger, a famous and
controversial Christian Socialist mayor of Vienna, occurred in early September 1897; and it was not until nearly twenty years later, in 1916, that
Glöckel reappeared in a position of educational significance. At that time
Glöckel put together a programme of educational reform for the tottering
empire, a programme which he began immediately to put into effect in
'German Austria' in early 1919, when he was put in charge of the ministry
of education of the new republic.
Changes of so radical a nature would probably not have been possible
were it not that, if for only a brief moment, the chaos attending the fall
of the Austro-Hungarian bureaucracy brought about a considerable reduction in the usual red tape. At any rate, experimental changes were
already in effect as early as the school year 1919-1920. Only a few need
to be mentioned here. The examination procedures according to which a
child's future academic career virtually had to be decided at the age of
11 were radically modified; military academies were abolished and their
sites transformed into state boarding schools for exceptionally able youths
from remote homes. Also abolished were some of the old types of finishing
schools for girls, like the Offizierstochterschule and the Madchenpensionate. The areas in which girls were permitted to study were expanded, and
married women were permitted to teach. Compulsory attendance at religious exercises was abolished; associations rather like the American Parent Teachers Association were formed; and instruction in the manual arts
and crafts was instituted, in order - among other aims - to give middleclass children the opportunity to acquire more respect for hand labour
by learning through experience that it was not so simple as it might
seem.
These are surface phenomena, of symbolic significance certainly, but of

311

W. W. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: W1TTGENSTE1N AND POPPER

of the German phrase 'sich etwas erarbeiten', it referred to an active
participation in lessons, aiming no longer simply at the storage of facts
of the Drillschule or Lernschule, but at the development of capabilities.
'Sich etwas erarbeiten' suggests acquiring knowledge by working or puzzling something out for oneself. What was wanted was more independent
and original thinking, activity, on the part of students - activity, as opposed to the fatigue that Herbart expected would set in when a pupil
dared to play an active role in his education.
Under the impact of such reforms the Austrian school system was
literally transformed between 1920 and 1926. But this was also a period
of deep social division for the first republic, accompanied by serious economic difficulties; and gradually the country became polarized politically
betweenthe Social Democrats -those like Glöckel who had undertaken and
carried out the school reform movement - and the much more conservative
Christian Socialist Party, dominated by the Roman Catholic Church. For
some seven years Social Democratic policies prevailed in the schools. By
the middle twenties, however, the Christian Socialists and other even more
right-wing groups began to grow rapidly stronger, resulting in a sharp retrenchment in the school reform - especially after the bitter political and
religious strife of 1926. By 1927, when the Christian Socialists had obtained
control almost everywhere in Austria except in the city of Vienna, the most
interesting experimentation was forced to halt - except, that is, in Vienna,
where the school reform movement continued under the leadership of
Glöckel, who became administrative president of the Vienna School
Council and remained in this office until 1934 - when the Dolifuss Dictatorship ended school reform, arrested many of its leaders, including
Glöckel, and forced its chief publications - the journals Die Queue and
Schuireform - to cease publication. During the censorship that followed
these journals were even locked up ('gesperrt') in the National Library,
and thus made inaccessible to the general reader.
One other fact needs stressing here, since it too will prove useful below
in understanding Wittgenstein. The compromises effected among the political parties in 1926 meant in practice that wherever the Social Democrats remained politically dominant - as in Vienna - Glockel's essential
programme (described by his opponents as 'school Bolshevism') could be
maintained. But in the country, after 1926 the Christian Socialists had
firm control of the schools.

Despite these upheavals, the general excellence that prevailed in Vienna
until 1934 ought not to be underestimated. Robert Dottrens, of the Institut Jean-Jacques Rousseau in Geneva, reported: "At the conclusion of
a tour through Czecho-Slovakia, Germany, Belgium, England and France,
I do not hesitate to say that Vienna is ahead of all the other cities of Europe
from the point of view of educational progress."8 Dottrens continued:
"It is to Vienna, the pedagogical Mecca.., that the new pilgrims of the
modern school must go to find the realization of their dreams and hopes."9

312

iii

Iv

One of the most important and famous shrines of this mecca was the
Pedagogical Institute of the City of Vienna, the leading figures of which
were Karl and Charlotte Bühler. As noted, an implicit psychology undergirded Glöckel's reforms: namely, a theory of the child as an active social
being whose mind was far more than a bucket to be filled with appropriate information. In its attack on the Drillschule and Lernschule, the
reform movement was essentially anti-Herbartian, anti-associationist,
anti-elementarist in psychology.
In 1923 Glöckel wrote: "Die ganze innere Schulreform ist wesentlich
auf die Ergebnisse der psychologischen Forschungen der Kindesseele aufgebaut."° Only a few months earlier, in 1922, Karl Bühler (27 May 187924 October 1963) the child psychologist, had been called to a chair of
philosophy and psychology both at the University of Vienna and at the
newly reorganized Pedagogical Institute. Bühler's career had begun in
Würzburg, where, in 1906, he became assistant to Kiilpe, the critical realist and critic of Mach's positivism. Following Kfllpe, Bühler began in
Wurzburg to develop the theory of 'imageless thought'. This idea, as
understood by Kulpe and Bflhler, was that in the intentional act of representation the particular image or model used, if any, need bear no
imaginal resemblance to what is represented. Abstract words, used conventionally in this process, cannot be reduced to sense impressions. International attention was focused on Bühler's early ideas, as published in
his habilitation thesis in 1907, as a consequence of a prolonged controversy with Wundt triggered by them. Bühler remained at WUrzburg for
only two years, following Külpe to Bonn in 1909 and to Munich in 1913.
Whilst still at WUrzburg, however, he became associated with Koffka,

314

W. W. BARTLEY, III

also an assistant to Kulpe at this time, but who was soon thereafter to
join Wertheimer and Köhler in forming the 'school' of Gestalt psychology. The association between Koffka and Bühler continued for many years,
but it was not harmonious. For Bühler claimed priority in developing
some of the basic laws and experiments of Gestalt psychology, and, as a
result, bitter polemics were exchanged.
By 1920 Bühler had also made important contributions to the theory
of language and to child and developmental psychology, fields which he
cultivated in collaboration with his wife, Charlotte Bühler, herself an important psychologist. These subjects, which played important roles in his
work at the Pedagogical Institute in Vienna and which were responsible
for his being called to this post, provided the themes of his major works:
Die geistige Entwicklung des Kindes (1918), an abridged version of which
was translated into English as The Mental Development of the Child (1930),
and of three other books, unfortunately still available only in German:
Die Krise der Psychologie (1926), Ausdruckstheorie (1933), and Sprachtheorie (1934).
Whatever Biihler's differences with the Gestalt psychologists were, their
theories were closely akin on many points - in particular in their opposition to associationist psychology, reductionism, behaviourism, positivism, psychological atomism. One need not rehearse here the main ideas
of Gestalt psychology, but one might emphasize how minor some of the
early Gestaltists considered the role of sense experience. Attacking the
associationist and empiricist principles of Locke and Hume, the principles of contiguity and frequency, they sought to show that theorymaking, organization, was a basic function of the human mind independent of associations of sense-impresions: structural properties of the human mind gave priority to the organizing and theorizing activity of the
mind, which in turn determined the kinds of wholes with which we would
deal as 'elements' of our thinking. The Gestalt psychologists did not
doubt that their views were valid not only in psychology but also in epistemology. Köhler, in particular, stressed that his argument against psychological atomism affected epistemological atomism too. And Bühler
rejected what he derisively called the view of language as physiognomy
-thaview,nshort icwasvroulyknwas'thepicur oyf
language' and as 'logical atomism', and which Bertrand Russell had described in these words: "In a logically correct symbolism there will always

1Ito1cx ,Jr

i-ti,

'v".

be a certain fundamental identity of structure between a fact and the
symbol for it; and.., the complexity of the symbol corresponds very closely with the complexity of the facts symbolized by it."
During his sixteen years in Vienna, Bühler acquired many students and
disciples who were later to attain distinction in their own right - among
them Paul Lazarsfeld, Egon Brunswik, Else Frenkel-Brunswik, Konrad
Lorenz, Karl Popper, Lotte Schenk-Danzinger, Albert Wellek, Edward
Tolman. Egon Brunswik's name may appear surprising in such a list because of his own well-known association with logical positivism. This
should not mislead one into thinking that Bühler looked favourably on
the positivist movement. As a professor in the University of Vienna he
naturally collaborated professionally with positivists; indeed, he and his
wife were very good friends of Moritz Schlick and his wife. To give two
pertinent examples of their professional cooperation, Schlick and Bühler
were Popper's Ph.D. examiners; and they were the Ph.D. examiners as
well for Thomas Stonborough, Ludwig Wittgenstein's nephew (who, incidentally, wote up his dissertation in Wittgenstein's hut in Norway).
However cordial their social and professional relations, Schlick and Bühler
were far removed philosophically. Indeed, Bühler regarded positivism
with a combination of hostility and contempt. It is reported that he found
it difficult to endure the thought that Brunswik had joined the Vienna
Circle and had then gone on in America to advocate operationism and
'unitary science'. This Bühler is said to have regarded as a personal betrayal.12
V

I have just described Karl Popper as one of Bflhler's disciples; and earlier
I mentioned the personal participation of both Wittgenstein and Popper
in the school reform movement. It is occasionally recalled that both
Wittgenstein and Popper were schoolteachers in and near Vienna during
the 1920's. But to my knowledge, no one has ever raised the question
whether their activities as schoolteachers might not be relevant to their
philosophies. I believe that there was a quite important relationship between these two activities.
Take Wittgenstein first. I am about to deal with the 'mystery years' in
his life between the completion of the Tractatus and his return to Cambridge in 1929. The story I am about to relate makes Wittgenstein

-o
wi,i(Afr#A

w. w. BARTLEY, iii

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: W1TTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

appear a more rational and sympathetic figure than other accounts I
know. Writers often express some puzzlement about Wittgenstein's behaviour after the first war. George Pitcher, for instance, in his introduction to Wittgenstein's life and thought, muses as follows: "A man of
acknowledged genius who, after knowing next to nothing about logic and
philosophy, had made important contributions to both fields within a
remarkably short period of time, a man who could not help having a
brilliant future in one of the most sophisticated of all intellectual disciplines - this man turned his back on all that and devoted himself to the
humble task of teaching young children in remote villages."3
I do not want in any way to criticize the excellent studies of Pitcher,
W. D. Hudson or many other writers who have been similarly puzzled by
Wittgenstein's behaviour; but one cannot help being mildly amused by
the notion that only a rather eccentric person would pass up an opportunity for academic success in England - particularly to go into elementary education! Wittgenstein was, however, hardly of the stuff of which
the typical British don is made. He was not even British: he was a patriotic Austrian who had during the war become a sort of socialist mandarin of a Tolstoian stamp of mind. I suggest that he deliberately and for
good reason chose elementary school teaching as a career. It is unlikely
that Wittgenstein chose school teaching because of the Reform Movement;
such was hardly his style, and the slogans of school reform were frequently of a vulgarity which would have irritated him. But his family, including
the two sisters who took a particular interest in him, Hermine Wittgenstein (who herself ran a day-school for poor boys in Vienna) and Margarete Stonborough, knew Glöckel personally; and Wittgenstein could
hardly have been unaware of the opportunities available through the new
movement. Again, Ludwig Erik Tesar, an active school reformer, was
one of the beneficiaries of Wittgenstein's famous bequest to Ludwig von
Ficker, better known for its more famous beneficiaries: Rainer Maria
Rilke and Georg Trakl. It would, however, be wrong to overemphasize
any such 'rational' element in Wittgenstein's choice. Shattered both mentally and physically by the war, he certainly took up his school teaching
career at least in part as a means of 'Arbeitstherapie'. And his choice
was strongly influenced even before his return to Vienna by the persuasion of his fellow-prisoner in Monte Cassino, Dr. Ludwig Hansel.
In any event, within ten days of his return to civilian life, Wittgenstein

was enrolled at a teacher training college - one of the first Lehrerbildungsanstalten operating under the general direction of Glöckel - and attended
the year-long course required for the certificate. By the autumn of 1920
he was teaching children in the third form, aged 9 and 10, in the tiny
village of Trattenbach in lower Austria.
About his day-to-day life as a schoolteacher the Wittgenstein literature
gives us comparatively few solid reports. We are told that Wittgenstein
was in constant friction with those around him, including his colleagues;
that he was unhappy in Trattenbach and was transferred first to Puchberg
(1922-1924) and then to Otterthal (1924-April 1926), also in lower Austria. Although he rarely saw his old English companions and admirers
during this period, he did not distantiate himself from the Austrian school
reform movement: he subscribed for a time to Die Queue and to Schulreform; and in 1924 he produced his official wordbook.'4
As a schoolteacher he is said to have been unusual in certain respects.
Pitcher reports:

316

•

317

The next class would often be kept waiting outside his door, and he regularly kept his
young charges one or two hours - sometimes longer - after the rest of the school had
been dismissed. The accepted teaching procedures held no interest for him; he was
always experimenting with new methods and devices of instruction. He dissected animal
corpses and assembled their skeletons, explained models of steam-engines, set up with
his students a potter's wheel on which they fashioned clay pots. . . . If he happened by
chance to meet some of his youngsters in the evening, he might give them instruction
in astronomy on the spot. In mathematics, he had great success; he took his students
well beyond the ordinary requirements for their class, and introduced the older, more
gifted ones to advanced problems in algebra.

Despite such successes, a serious crisis flared up in Otterthal in 1926
having to do in part with complaints arising from his disciplining of a
child. This led to a trial and a compulsory psychiatric examination for
Wittgenstein. Although he was eventually acquitted, Wittgenstein voluntarily resigned his post in April 1926, thus bringing his career as schoolteacher to a close.
Taken in isolation, these events might appear odd but, apart from their
having happened to Wittgenstein, not terribly important. If we fit them
into the background of the school reform movement, however, we get a
more intelligible and significant picture. For example, Wittgenstein's
practice of disregarding the so-called 'usual' school periods, the division
of the school day into 'periods', was a policy entirely consistent with

318

W. w. BARTLEY, HI

Glöckel's principle of integrated instruction, which allowed individual
teachers to determine how and when they would turn from one subject
to another. indeed every teacher was encouraged to experiment for himself, here as in other areas.
The claim that "the next class would often be kept waiting outside his
door" by Wittgenstein is false. it suggests the changing of rooms procedure with which we are familiar in the upper grades of our elementary
schools and in junior high and high schools. But as it happens this system
was not in use in Wittgenstein's schools. Richard Meister reports of
Austria in the 20's and 30's: "in the eight-year elementary schools in the
country, as well as in the general elementary schools and final grades in
the cities, there is a system of class teachers, where one master teaches all
subjects except religion. The latter is given by special teachers of religion
for each denomination separately. In the higher elementary schools there
is a system of subject teachers, where each subject or group of subjects is
taught by specially trained teachers."5 Since Wittgenstein was a lower
elementary schoolteacher there was no changing of classes in his school,
a fact which I have confirmed by discussing these matters with Wittgenstein's former colleagues and students. Rather, it was not the students
but the local priest (Father Alois Neururer, in Trattenbach), who was
often kept waiting outside the door by Wittgenstein's experimental
teaching!
In any case, the tale about Wittgenstein's resignation following complaints about his rough disciplining of certain students is incomplete as
it stands. Since school discipline of the roughest sort had been common in
the Habsburg domains, and was still common during the 20's and 30's
(bamboo sticks often being used, so I am told), it is prima facie unlikely
that his colleagues would not have supported him (as some of them indeed did) against a parent's complaint - even if the charge were true.
Of course it is possible that Wittgenstein did mercilessly beat one of his
charges - but such conduct does not accord with the memories of his
former pupils in Trattenbach and Otterthal, who stressed that although
Wittgenstein was strict his punishment was always fair.
Another explanation occurs to me. I conjecture that, as can often happen in schools, some small disciplinary quarrel was made the pretext for
a more deep-seated complaint - very likely through some sort of collaboration (the details of which we are not likely ever to learn) among some

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTE1N AND POPPER

319

of the townspeople, some of the local clerics (but not Neururer, who was
a friend of Wittgenstein), and some of Wittgenstein's superiors and colleagues. For it will be recalled that the resignation came in 1926, an
exceedingly turbulent year in schools throughout Austria. I suggest that
conservative farmer forces in Otterthal lost no time in sending packing
back to Vienna a man whom they must have felt threatening to them in
many ways: Wittgenstein was thought to be rich (a story which is not
strictly true: he made over most of his fortune - which was producing an
annual income of 300000 Kronen in 1914 - to his sisters Hermine and
Helene and his brother Paul. The fortune was not affected by the
German and Austrian wartime and postwar inflation, neither during the
war when still in Wittgenstein's name, nor later, when in the names of his
siblings. For before his death in January 1913, Ludwig's father, Karl
Wittgenstein, had invested virtually his entire fortune, apart from real
estate, in American iron and steel stocks. That money which the family
earned within Austria during the First World War with government bonds
and similar investments was invested in real estate prior to the outbreak
of serious inflation; and in the period between the wars the family fortune
was kept largely in Holland, once again safe from inflation. Wittgenstein's
siblings in effect held this money in trust for him, in case he should ever
want it back, until the mid 1930's when, with the approach of war, the
fortune was distributed amongst Wittgenstein's nephews and nieces and
other family members.) He was a socialist; he was known not to be Roman
Catholic; he was a proponent of progressive education, the author of a
positivist tract, was known by his villagers to be homosexual and thought
by some of them to be a misogynist to boot; and - what must have been
hardest to bear - he was an extremely successful teacher for all that. His
effect on his students was virtually magical.
To turn to Karl Popper, usually regarded as one of Wittgenstein's
antagonists. Everybody knows that Popper's main formal background
was in physics and mathematics. It so happens, however, that what everybody knows is false. In fact, Popper is an amateur physicist and mathematician, his formal training having been in education and in Gestalt psychology, under the supervision of Karl Biihler.'6 His thesis for his teacher's
training certificate (1927) was entitled: 'Gewohnheit und Gesetzerlebnis';
and his doctoral dissertation, Zur Methodenfrage der Denkpsychologie
(1928), was a defense of Bühler's ideas - as outlined for instance in Die

320

W. W. BARTLEY, III

Krise der Psychologie - against the associationist physicalistic ideas of
Schlick, which Popper vigorously attacked.'7
Unlike Wittgenstein, Popper was not a recluse, but was for a time actively involved in socialist party activities in Vienna and in the School
Reform Movement. One of the more important figures with whom Popper
collaborated in his political and social activities was Alfred Adler.
Throughout this period Adler worked as closely as he was permitted with
the school reform movement in Vienna. Adlerians, including Adler himself, contributed to Die Queue and Schuireforin; Adler gave courses at
the Volksheim and at the Pedagogical Institute; and some of his disciples
- e.g., Birenbaum, Scharmer and Spiel - opened an Adlerian school for
children of poor Viennese families in September 1931. An Adlerian child
guidance clinic was opened as a pilot project at the Volksheim; and eventually twenty-eight such centres existed in Vienna, most of them situated
within school buildings. Stressing his ideological kinship with the Bühlers,
Adler argued that individual psychology showed many ideas in common
with Gestalt psychology; and Wolfgang Köhler later agreed with this
evaluation - although without reference to the Bühlers. In his book on
Adler, Lewis Way writes that the viewpoint of Gestalt psychology "is
as near as one could wish, given its different subject matter, to that of
Individual Psychology."8 Another social and psychological theory closely akin to Adler's in some respects is Popper's doctrine of 'the logic of the
situation'.'9
And this leads me from my digression on Adler back to Popper. It
was not only through Adler that Popper was involved in the School Reform Movement. Indeed, Popper has often told the story of his personal
break with Adler.2° Popper also worked with Eduard Burger, the
editor of Die Queue, and contributed articles on pedagogy to both Schulreform and Die Queue. These virtually unknown publications, in which
some of Popper's later ideas are sketched, include two fairly substantial
articles ('Zur Philosophie des Heimatgedankens', and 'Die Gedächtnispflege unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Selbsttätigkeit', published in Die
Queue), and a piece of juvenilia, 'Uber die Stellung des Lehrers zu Schule
und Schiller', published in Schuireform. Popper also published dozens
of short reviews of books and of articles on psychological and educational
topics. These reviews, sometimes only a few lines in length, are occasionally revealing about Popper's allegiances, betraying his exten-

sive familiarity with the publications of Adler's school as well as his
alliance with Bühler in the latter's quarrels with the Koffka group. For
instance, in reviewing a work on Gestalt psychology published in
1931, Popper complains that it fails to consider the views of Külpe and
Bfihler.21
Considering the depth of Popper's involvement with both individual
psychology and Gestalt psychology, it is curious that in his later writings
he mentions them so rarely: some brief, favourable but mildly critical
remarks about Gestalt psychology - without any reference to the individual founders of the school - are to be found in The Poverty of Historicism.22 Popper's interest in education, on the other hand, can easily be
seen in his later works, perhaps best in his essay 'Back to the Pre-Socratics', where he contrasts the dogmatic as opposed to critical traditions in
education.
-

When one views Popper's thought against this background, it is hard,
surprising as it may seem to some, to find much of strikingly novelty in
his philosophy. His methodology turns out to be in effect a kind of critical
continuation of the theories of Kifipe, Biihler, and Koffka - one that also
bears a close resemblance on many points with the work of Piaget. I
mention Piaget because it is sometimes said that his theory differs from
that of the Gestalt psychologists in that he - by contrast to the Gestaltists thinks that learning occurs not only in the elaboration of intellectual
structures but also in perception. Some Gestaltists have indeed written as
if perceptual constancies of shape and size belong to the object perceived
and are not modifiable by the observer. Whether or not this is a misreading of the intentions of most of the Gestalt writers, it is clear that for
Piaget perception of such things as figures is not only gradually built up
but also gradually corrected. Clearly BUhler, as well as the teachers of art
in Vienna with whom he collaborated, held such a view. And Popper's
view of conjecture and refutation or, as expressed by his associate E. H.
Gombrich, 'making and matching' - is also close to Piaget.
Popper's attacks on the positivists may, then, be construed as direct
applications of the attacks already mounted by Koffka and Bflhler on the
associationist psychologists. Even some of Popper's constructive ideas,
including the emphasis on testability in connection with the hypotheticodeductive method, may be found in the work of his teachers: in particular,
in that of Heinrich Gomperz.2' Popper's views acquire their distinctive

322

W. W. BARTLEY, HI

form and emphases from the fact that they were elaborated in dialogue
with the logical positivists; but they acquire no originality from this circumstance. Popper's notorious disagreements with Otto Neurath (18821945), for example, if put into the context of Popper's real ideological
background, no longer appear like the internal feuding of two positivists;
they are the disagreements of men sharply opposed on basic issues.
Neurath had also contributed to Die Queue, outlining as his contribution
to educational reform the so-called 'Viennese method', suggesting the use
of pictures rather than words in tables of statistics, in order to avoid
verbal misunderstandings arising from translation from one language to
another. His tables, so Neurath maintained, could be used throughout
the world without regard to language, and would, incidentally, contribute
to the creation of a 'universal language.'24 This was only part of his broad
programme of visual education, which aimed for an international language of simplified pictures, or 'isotypes'. In essence, Neurath's 'Vienna
Method' aimed to give an invariant and self-explanatory pictorial sign
for any given thing.
It is hard to imagine a more striking contrast than that between this
theory for educational reform through linguistic reform and BUhler's
theory of language and of imageless thought. What was a programme for
Neurath, was, in effect, a problem for Bflhler. In particular, BUhler was
puzzled by the remoteness of child art (which he treated as representational in this context) from our visual experience; and he found an explanation for this phenomenon in our use of language - but without in
any way suggesting that our language need on this account to be reformed.
Arguing that children do not draw what they see but what they know or
remember, BUhler explains that this is due to their mastery of language
which, he writes, "models the mind of man according to its requirements." 25

"As soon as objects have received their names," Bühler continues,
"the formation of concepts begins, and these take the place of concrete
images. Conceptual knowledge, which is formulated in language, dominates the memory of the child. What happens when we try to impress
some event on our own memories? As a rule the concrete images fade,
but as far as the facts are capable of being expressed in language, we
remember them. This development begins as early as the second year in
the child and when it begins to draw - in its third or fourth year - its

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTE1N AND

oi'.ir

.,

memory is by no means a storehouse of separate pictures, but an encyclopedia of knowledge. The child draws from its knowledge, that is how
its schematic drawings come about. ... If it wants to draw a man, it does
not look around for a model or copy, but cheerfully goes ahead with its
task and puts into the drawing whatever it knows about a man and whatever comes to mind. The man must have two eyes, even in profile, the
horseman two legs. Clothes are hung round him afterwards, as one would
clothe a doll. One can see what is in his pockets and the coins in his purse,
as in an X-ray photograph. Models and copies at most serve as suggestive
impulses." 26

Bühler continues: "The order of a story is not necessarily the spatial
order of the objects it describes. If we read in a fairy tale: 'the dwarf had
a huge head and two short little legs, snow white hands and a nose like a
glowing coal,' we should certainly not criticize the style because of the
irregular order adopted. If such a sentence were to guide the efforts of a
child that does not see the picture in its mind as a whole, we might expect
that the short legs will be drawn as growing straight from the head and
the hands likewise. The nose, again, might be put in its proper place in
the middle of the face. But that is exactly what we see in some of the earliest pictorial efforts of the child. Its drawings are, in a sense, graphic
accounts. Looked at in this way, the irregular order found in its drawings
becomes intelligible. We cannot simply assume that the mind of the child
is in a state of chaos, because if these graphic accounts be translated into
language, they might be found to be well ordered. The fault lies not so
much in a chaotic mind, as in errors of translating from knowledge - formulated in language - to the spatial order of pictorial representation •" 27
In effect, BUhler is suggesting that representational drawing is one 'language-game' (although he does not use this phrase) in which children and
others may engage. This game or activity has its own rules which are not
the same as those of descriptive or representational verbal language. Moreover, attempting to apply the rules of the one representational activity to
the other activity - equally representational - may result in distortion.
If one wishes to learn to draw, then one must learn how to translate knowledge formulated in language into accurate drawing. But inaccurate drawing, inaccurate pictorial rendering, is in itself no index whatsoever of
linguistic or conceptual confusion. Biihler would reject Neurath's educational programme, as well as that of the Russell-Wittgenstein of the 'pic-

324

W. W. BARTLEY, 111

ture theory' as entirely unwarranted and bound to be self-defeating, being
based on untenable psychological and linguistic premises.
BUhier's own ideas about teaching children how to draw were applied
quite directly in Vienna by such craftsmen teachers as Franz Cizek. As
Dottrens reports Cizek's method: "The class .. . is asked to draw some
ordinary object, say a pair of scissors. No model is put before them; the
pupils draw from memory this object which they have occasion to use
every day. With how many errors and how much difficulty they produce
a satisfactory picture of that little instrument which they have seen a hundred times, but never really observed! The drawing finished, the teacher
and the class examine together a pair of scissors ... Next each one makes
another drawing, as before, trying to keep in mind the attentive observations he has just made. In this way Cizek's teaching leads to cultivation of
the sense of observation, and a continual growth of the capacity of ex8 Here again we find an account virtually identical with Poppers's theory of conjecture and refutation and E. H. Gombrich's application of it to art in his book Art and Illusion and elsewhere, through his
concept of 'making and matching'.
VI

I mentioned earlier the possibility of construing the later thought of
Wittgenstein as that of an amateur but gifted child psychologist who
turned, partly as the result of his experiences in school teaching during
the twenties, from an essentially associationist psychology to a configurationism or contextualism closer to that of the Gestaltists. It is to this
theme that I now wish to return.
In Zettel 412, Wittgenstein asks: "Am I doing child psychology?", and
answers: "I am making a connexion between the concept of teaching and
the concept of
Wittgenstein's question whether he is doing child psychology obviously
does have to be answered affirmatively. Zettel, The Philosophical Investigations, and The Blue and Brown Books must be read in a number of different ways. But two of the necessary ways in which one must read them
are: (1) as polemics on the atomism represented by the Tractatus or by
Russell or Herbart; and (2) as attempts to develop a child psychology of
language. After all, how does the Investigations open except as a critique

of St. Augustine's account of how a child learns a language? Indeed,
much of the first part of the Investigations focuses on the question of how
children learn their native languages.
Moreover, since his child psychology is developed in part as a polemic
against his earlier atomism, that atomism could not have been, as has
been occasionally affirmed in recent years, purely formal, neutral with
respect to psychological issues: it was also psychological. Whether it was
identical with the particular sense-data theories of Russell or the positivists is of course quite another question.
My suggestion, then, is that there exists an important family resemblance between the views of the Gestalt psychologists, Popper's philosophy of science, and the views of the later Wittgenstein. To avoid misunderstanding, I am not chiefly interested here in making categorical
claims about 'intellectual influences'. That Popper's thought was decisively moulded by that of Bühler, Kulpe and the Gestalt psychologists
is beyond dispute. Whether Wittgenstein was directly influenced by Bühler
or other of the Gestalt theoreticians is uncertain. He definitely was familiar with Bühler's ideas. The connection here is more direct - and more
complicated - than it would be simply because of Wittgenstein's participation in school reform. Wittgenstein knew Karl and Charlotte Biihler
socially and personally: in fact they were present at the famous first encounter between Wittgenstein and Moritz Schlick, as the guests of Wittgenstein's sister, Frau Margarete Stonborough,3' and had been invited at
the suggestion of Wittgenstein's nephew, who was studying with BUhler at
the University of Vienna. Whether Wittgenstein ever made any conscious
connection between Biihler's psychology and his own later thought is,
however, an open question. Friends and members of his family recall
that Wittgenstein did not like the Bühlers personally, and that he occasionally referred to Karl Bühler as a 'charlatan'. This personal reaction,
however, by no means precludes at least some positive intellectual influence.
As for the 'family resemblances' among these thinkers, I have room to
mention only a few of the most striking features. Foremost, perhaps, is
the common opposition found in these three ways of thinking to psychological and logical atomism.
Second, there is the contextualism or configurationsim shared by them.
According to the Wittgenstein of the Investigations, there is no sense in

W. W. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: W1TTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

talking of a one-to-one correspondence between the simples of language
and the simples of reality (even assuming such simples exist). Wittgenstein
reasons that simplicity is not a matter of absolutes, but is context-dependent: one might break down the visual image of a flower into all the
different colours of which it is composed.32 But as Wittgenstein shows in
Investigations 47, the question of which properties are more simple makes
little sense. Multi-colouredness is one kind of complexity; being composed of straight lines is yet another. Since, on Wittgenstein's view, we
use the words 'composite' and 'simple' in a great many different ways,
and ways that are also differently related, questions that presuppose absolute complexity and simplicity apart from context are not answerable and
ought not to be asked.
If we turn to Popper - or to one of his disciples, like Paul Feyerabend,
who was also influenced by Wittgenstein - we find an entirely different
way of putting the matter. But the basic point, and the family resemblance,
remains. For Popper and Feyerabend too, what is relevant in one's analysis of an object will depend upon the theory one is entertaining or testing.
Like Wittgenstein, Popper also uses a series of geometrical shapes to illustrate his argument. In Appendix No. * 10 of The Logic of ScientfIc
Discovery (p. 421), he presents a series of shaded and plain circles, triangles, squares and rectangles to show that "similarity, and with it repetition, always presuppose the adoption of a point of view." As shown by
this example, and indeed throughout Popper's writings, the problem on
which a scientist may be working will determine which theories are relevant - which in turn determines which 'simples', or observation statements, are relevant. The network of problems, theory, and observation
make up the context which determines relative simplicity and complexity.
As for Wittgenstein and Popper, so for the Gestalt psychologists. Take
Külpe's famous experiment with cards (which also bears some resemblance to Wittgenstein's example of coloured boxes in Investigations 48).
Kulpe had contrived his experiment to combat Mach's claim that mental
processes could be reduced to sensations; in it, Kfllpe presented his subjects with cards containing nonsense syllables of various colours and arrangement. Some subjects were asked to report on the colour, others on
the pattern, others on the number of the items seen. In every case, the
subject abstracted the features he had been instructed to report and made
no mention of- and in many cases did not even remember! - other fea-

tures of the card which could easily well have been taken as simples. Here
again the answers depended on the question, on the context. Whereas for
the associationist organization or theory arises from previous association,
for Külpe and the other Gestaltists association depends on organization
or theory.
Thirdly, there is the conventionalism in respect to words (not sentences
or theories) shared by Wittgenstein, Popper, and many of the Gestaltists.
That both Popper and Wittgenstein - rejecting the picture theory of language - regard words as tools is so familiar that it does not bear comment. In both cases, in Popper explicitly, in Wittgenstein implicitly (as
Feyerabend has pointed out)33 there is an attack on 'essentialism' in respect to words. The case of KUlpe is less well known. For Kulpe, abstract
words, being 'impalpable', cannot be reduced to sensations - or otherwise reduced; they are used instrumentally.
Fourthly, and closely related to this conventionalism, is the idea of
'imageless thought'. I have already referred briefly to the views of Kiilpe
and Bühler on this matter. Roughly the same idea occurs frequently in
Wittgenstein: for example, in Philosophical Investigations 395, 396, and
397. One can do no better than quote Wittgenstein himself: "There is a
lack of clarity about the role of imaginability in our investigation. Namely, about the extent to which it insures that a proposition makes sense. It
is no more essential to the understanding of a proposition that one should
imagine anything in connexion with it, than that one should make a
sketch from it. Instead of 'imaginability' one can also say here: representability by a particular method of representation. And such a representation may indeed safely point a way to further use of a sentence. On the
other hand a picture may obtrude itself upon us and be of no use at all."
Wittgenstein talks in a similar way in his Lectures and Conversations,34
where he denies that when a Frenchman says 'fl pleut' and an Englishman
says 'It is raining', something happens in both minds which is the real
sense of 'It is raining'. Wittgenstein writes: "We imagine something like
imagery, which is the international language.35 Whereas in fact: (1) Thinking (or imagery) is not an accompaniment of the words as they are spoken
or heard. (2) The sense in the thought 'It's raining' is not even the words
with the accompaniment of some sort of imagery."
One could continue to sketch such family resemblances among the
ideas of Wittgenstein, Popper, and the Gestaltists. For example, one could

326

327

328

3Z9

W. W. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGEN STEIN AND POPPER

compare the accounts Bilhler and Wittgenstein give of the relationship
between naming and describing and Popper's critique of the 'causal theory of naming'. But enough has been said to indicate a broad family resemblance. A more detailed survey of the similarities and differences among
these thinkers could be carried out on some other occasion.
And indeed, even if it does go without saying - and even if Wittgenstein would nonetheless be the first to say it - there are many many differences between the theories I have sketched. But one needs comparable
theories at one's disposal before the important job of differentiation can
be carried out: to do intellectual history one must compare and differentiate. Either alone is insufficient.
Indeed, Popper, Wittgenstein, and the Gestalt psychologists would have
to agree that it is not only shapes and figures which are similar or different depending on their 'ground' or context. People and their ideas are
also similar or different in relationship to a background. By providing some
of the missing background of the 'very different' philosophies of Wittgenstein, Popper, and the Gestaltists, I have tried to bring out some of
their similarities on basic issues.
But, to repeat, I have not solved the intriguing and complicated question, why the background was allowed to disappear in the first place. To
answer that question would involve a vast programme of research - one
that I hope will one day be carried out.

mon prejudices regarding the highlights of our recent philosophical history bear little relationship to the facts.

VII

One can hardly sum up such a paper as this except by remarking that
'there are things in Vienna undreamt of by our philosophies'. Wittgenstein, Popper, and the members of the Vienna Circle were not the only,
nor even the most important philosophical thinkers to flourish in Central
Europe in the 20's and 30's - even if they were the most important philosophical thinkers whose ideas emerged from Central Europe. Conceivably,
the common practice of emphasizing their ideas may have some pedagogical value - just as teaching the history of philosophy in the 18th century as if it were the story of the development from Locke, through
Berkeley, to Hume, may be pedagogically convenient. Personally, I doubt
that this is so: such parochialism is rarely desirable, pedagogically or
otherwise. Whatever the answer to the pedagogical question, these corn-

California State University, Hayward
Written in Ascona, Switzerland
Augu.t 1968
Bibliographical postscript. Due to the delay in the publication of the present monograph
I add this note in proof. I have been studying central European intellectual history of
the period between the two World Wars for some ten years. A small part of my research,
which greatly amplifies the information on Wittgenstein's Austrian context, was published in 1973 in my book Wittgenstein. The present monograph overlaps in some
places with that book, but is for the greater part supplementary to it. Most of the
material on Gestalt psychology and all of the material on Sir Karl Popper is presented
here for the first time.
This monograph was read at Boston University in October 1968, and also served as
the basis of papers I read to the Western Pennsylvania Philosophical Association, to the
Philosophy Colloquium of Vanderbilt University, to California State University, Hayward, and to the Humanities Seminar of California Institute of Technology. Abbreviated forms have twice been published in German. After a meeting in Minneapolis in
1969 the essay was copied and freely circulated without my prior knowledge, and it has
since then been quoted both in periodical publications and in dissertations.36
Scholarly attention to Austrian intellectual history has significantly advanced during
the past decade. Among those works which have contributed to understanding of this
period and of Wittgenstein's Austrian context are: Paul Eagelmann: Letters from
Ludwig Wittgenstein with a Memoir, 1967; Wilma Abeles Iggers: Karl Kraus: A Viennese Critic of the Twentieth C'entury, 1967; Frank Field: The Last Days of Mankind:
Karl Kraus and His Vienna, 1967; and William M. Johnston: The Austrian Mind, 1972.
A less responsible work on these matters is: Allan Janik and Stephen Toulmin:
Wittgenstein's Vienna, 1973.

Unfortunately, there has been no comparable development in the understanding of
Popper and his thought in their Austrian context. His book Objective Knowledge, 1972,
fails to indicate the significance of Buhler's work or of his Viennese background. A
general hagiographic account of Popper's life and work by Bryan Magee (Karl Popper,
1973) almost completely neglects his education and early development, and does not
mention Bllhler.
NOTES
1 Wolfgang Kohler Dynamics in Psychology, Washington Square Press, New York,
1965, pp. 116 and 122.
2 Acknowledgements: This work would have been impossible without the help of the
following persons. Needless to say, they are in no way responsible for my conclusions
and have in several cases disagreed with them. I also am indebted to several persons
who, for reasons of their own, do not wish their names to be mentioned. My most
sincere thanks go to: Frau Anny Eder, Vienna; Herr Helmut Kasper, Innsbruck;

W. W. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

Professor Russell Dancy, Cornell University; Professor I. M. Bochenski, University
of Fribourg, Switzerland; the late Professor Rudolf Carnap; Professors Joseph Agassi,
Marx Wartofsky, and R. S. Cohen, Boston University; Professor J. 0. Wisdom, York
University, Toronto; Professor Paul K. Feyerabend, University of California, Berkeley;
Professor Richard H. Popkin, Washington University, St. Louis; Professor Bernard
Kaplan, Clark University; Dr. W. D. Hudson, University of Exeter, Professor Sylvain
Bromberger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Professors Walter Kaufmann and
George Pitcher, Princeton University; Dr. George Steiner, Cambridge University; Professor Charlotte BOhler, Los Angeles; Professor Albert Wellek, University of Mains;
Professor Viktor Kra.ft, University of Vienna; Herr and Frau Rudolf Koder, Vienna;
Herr Dr. F. Lenz, Vienna; Dr. Thomas H. W. Stonborough, Vienna; Frau Gerda
Leber-Hagenau, Vienna; Dr. Gustav Lebzeltern, Graz; Dr. Günter Posch, Innsbruck;
Mr. Wallace Nethery, Hoose Library, University of Southern California; Herr Karl
Gruber, Vienna; Herr und Frau Konrad Gruber, Vienna; Dr. Harms Jager, Stadtbibliothek, Vienna; Herr Dir. Martin Scherleitner, Schwarzau; Herr Norbert Rosner,
Puchberg am Schneeberg; Frau L. Hausmann, Kirchberg am Wechsel; Frau Dir.
Georg Berger, Trattenbach; Professor Herbert Spiegelberg, Washington University;
Professor Herbert Feigi, University of Minnesota; Frau Margarete Bicklmayer,
Otterthal; Herr Franz Brenner, Trattenbach; Herr Johann Scheibenbauer, Trattenbach;
Herr BOrgermeister Emmerich Koderhold, Trattenbach; Professor F. A. von Hayek,
Salzburg.
I am also indebted to the staff of the following institutions for their cooperation and
help: Landesarchiv für Niederosterreich, Vienna; Kriegsarchiv, Staatsarchiv, Vienna;
Padagogisches Institut der Stadt Wien; Padagogische ZentralbOcherei, Vienna; Stadtschulrat für Wien, Vienna; Stadtarchiv, Bielefeld; Stadtarchiv, Korbach.
I am deeply indebted to the Research Committees of the University of Pittsburgh;
of Gonville and Caius College, Cambrige University; and of the University of California,
which at various times supported my investigations into German and Austrian intellectual history.

Menschen und der Tiere, Verlag Hans Huber, Bern and Stuttgart, 1960, pp. 96-99.
And see Albert Wellek, 'Karl Buhler 1879-1963', Archiv fur die gesamte Psychologie
116 (1964) 2-8.
George Pitcher, The Philosophy of Wittgenstein, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
1964, pp. 6-9. See also W.D. Hudson, Ludwig Wittgenstein, JohnKnox Press, Richmond,
1968.
14 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Wdrterbuch für Volksschulen, Holder-Pichler-Tempsky A. G.,
Vienna, 1926. The following appears on the title page: "Mit dem Erlasse des Bundesministeriums für Unterricht vom 12. Oktober 1925, Z. 15444/9, zum Unterrichtsgebrauch an ailgemeinen Volksschulen und an Bfirgerschulen ailgemein zugelassen."
15 Richard Meister, "Teacher Training in Austria', Harvard Educational Review 8
(1938) 112-121.
16 Popper did of course have some formal training in physics, having attended Hans
Thirring's lectures.

See Karl Strack, Geschichre des deutschen Volksschulwesens, Gütersloh 1872, pp. 327
and 329-30; and also Charles A. Gulick, Austria from Habsburg to Hitler, The University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1948, Vol. I, p. 546.

24 See Otto Neurath, 'Die Padagogische Weltbedeutung der Bildstatistik nach Wiener
Methode', Die Quelle, 1933. Another positivist to contribute to the reform movement
publications was Edgar Zilsel, whose article, 'Kant als Erzieher', appeared in Schulreform (1924) 182ff. Rudolf Carnap has told me that on his arrival in Vienna in 1926
he heard much discussion about the school reform, and remarked on its many differences from the German school reform movement with which he was well acquainted,
having known some of the Landerziehungsheime led by Lietz, Wyneken, and Bondui.
25 Karl BOhler, The Mental Development of the Child, Harcourt, Brace and Co., New
York, 1930, pp. 106ff. See also E. H. Gombrich, Meditations on a Hobby Horse, Phaidon
Press, New York 1963, p. 8, and the criticisms of this view which Gombrich cites
therein.
26 Bühler Mental Development, op. cit., pp. 113-115.
27 Ibid., pp. 116, 120.
28 Dottrens, op. cit., p. 64.
29 That Wittgenstein was 'in essential respects' a Kantian philosopher has frequently
been maintained. See Erik Stenius, Wittgenstein's 'Tractatus', Basil Blackwell, Oxford,
1960, and also J. Fang, 'Wittgenstein vs. Kant in a Philosophy of Mathematics', Akten
des XIV. Internationalen Kongresses für Philosophie, Herder Verlag Vienna, 1968, pp.
233-236. I take issue with such Kantian interpretations of Wittgenstein in my book
Wittgenstein, I. B. Lippincott, New York, 1973.

330

" H. Gomperz, 'Philosophy in Austria During the Last Sixty Years', The Personalist
(1936) 307-311.
Die Queue 81 (1931) 607-619.
6 J• F. Herbart, Outlines of Educational Doctrine, Macmillan, 1904, p. 165.

There was of course nothing new in this. Already in 1911, at the Congress for the
Education of Youth in Dresden, Kerschensteiner (who was later to serve as the model
for Hagauer in Robert Musil's novel Der Mann ohne Eigenschaften) had maintained
that a public school that neglected practical education did the public a disservice, and
went on to demand that students be trained in manual labour as well.
8 Robert Dottrens, The New Education in Austria, The John Day Co., New York,
1930, p. ix.
Ibid., p. 202. Similar testimony may be found in Richard Meister, 'Teacher Training
in Austria', Harvard Educational Review 8 (1938) 112-121.
10 Otto Glbckel, Die Osterreichische Schulreform, Verlag der Wiener Volksbuchbandlung, Vienna, 1923, p.11.
11 See Bertrand Russell, 'The Philosophy of Logical Atomism', The Monist, 1918-19.
See also Buhler's critical comments on Carnap in Das Geslaltprinzzp im Leben des

331

17 Zur Methodenfrage der Denkpsychologie is available in the University of Vienna
Library. Gewohnheit und Gesetzerlebnis is described by Popper in Conjectures and
Refutat ions, p. 50.

Lewis Way, Adler's Place in Psychology, Collier Books, New York, 1962, p. 318.
See my paper: W. W. Bartley, III 'Theories of Demarcation between Science and
Metaphysics', in Problems in the Philosophy of Science (ed. by I. Lakatos and A. F.
Musgrave), North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1968.
20 K. R. Popper, 'Science: Conjectures and Refutations', in Conjectures and Refutations, Basic Books, New York, 1962.
21 Padagogische Zeitschriftenschau', Die Quelle 82, 301.
22 Cp. pp. 76-8 and pp. 82-3. Von UxkUll's theories, praised by Popper in Conjectures
and Refutat ions, p. 382, are close to some versions of Gestalt psychology - to Kurt
Lewin's cognitive field theory for example.
Heinrich Gomperz, 'Kann die Deduktion zu 'neuen' Ergebnissen fOhren?', Kantstudien (1930) 466-479.

333

W. W. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

80 Ludwig Wittgeastein Zettel (ed. by G. E. M. Anscombe and 0. H. von Wright),
University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1967, p. 74e.

Bilhler, K., 'Forschung zur Sprachtheorie: Einleitung', Arch. ges. Psychol. 94 (1935),
401-412.

31 See Paul Engelmann, Letters from Ludwig Wittgenstein with a Memoir, Basil
Blackwell, Oxford 1967, Chapter V, p. 118; and B. F. McGuinness, Friedrich Waismann:
Wittgenstein und der Wiener Kreis, Basil Blackwell, Oxford 1967, p. 15n. I am indebted
to Joseph Agassi for calling this reference to my attention in October 1968, after the
first draft of this paper had been completed.
32 And even here, a rather sophisticated theory of colour absolutes is presupposed!
83 P. K. Feyerabend, 'Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations', in K. T. Fann (ed.)
Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Man and His Philosophy, Dell Publishing Co, New York,
1967, pp. 214-250.

BUhler, K., Das Gestaltprinzip im Leben des Menschen und der Tiere, Verlag Hans
Huber, Bern and Stuttgart, 1960.
Bühler, K., Abrifi der geistigen Entwicklung des Kleinkindes, Quelle mid Meyer, Heidelberg, 1967.
Bühler, K., Die Uhren der Lebewesen und Fragmente aus dem Nachiass, herausgegeben
and mit einer Biographie versehen von Gustav Lebzeltern unter BenUtzung von
Vorarbeiten von Hubert Rzainger. Foreword by Hubert Rohracher, Hermann
Böhlaus Nachf., Komrnissionsverlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vienna, 1969.
Bühler, K., Die Zukunfi der Psychologie und die Schule, Heft 11, Schriften des Pädagogischen Institutes der Stadt Wien, Deutscher Verlag für Jugend and Volk, WienLeipzig.

332

p. 30.
Is this a veiled criticism of Neurath?
36 See, for example, D. W. Harding's review article of Wolfgang Kohler's 'The Task of
Gestalt Psychology', in The New York Review of Books, December 18, 1969, pp. 16-20.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Achs, 0., 'Die Schulreform in der Ersten Republik (1918-1927)', Osterreich in Geschichte und Literatur 13 (1969) 223-235.
Bartley, W. W., Ill, 'Rationality versus the Theory of Rationality', in The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy, Free Press, New York, 1964.

Bartley, W. W., ifi, 'Theories of Demarcation between Science and Metaphysics', in
Problems in the Philosophy of Science (ed. by I. Lakatos and A. E. Musgrave),
North-Holland PubI. Co., Amsterdam, 1968.
Bartley, W. W., III, 'Sprach- und Wissenschaftstheorie als Werkzeuge einer Schulreform: Wittgenstein und Popper als österreichische Schullehrer', Conceptus 3 (1969)
6-22, Innsbruck-Munchen-Salzburg.
Bartley, W. W., III, 'Die österreichische Schuireform als die Wiege der modernen Philosophie', Club Voltaire, Jahrbuch für kritische Aufklarung, Vol. IV, Rowohlt Paperback, 1970.

Bartley, W. W., III, Wittgenstein, 1. B. Lippincott, New York, 1973 and Quartet Books,
London, 1974.
Basil, 0., Trakl, Rowohit, Hamburg, 1965.
Beitrage zur Problemgeschichte der Psychologie, Festschrift for Karl Buhler's 50th
Birthday, 1929.

Belohoubek, V., 'Schuiwesen', in Stepan (ed), Neu-Osterreich, Vienna 1923, p.253.
Benjamin, W., Illuminations (ed. with introduction by Hannah Arendt), Schocken
Books, New York, 1969.
Buhler, K., Die geistige Entwicklung des Kindes, Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena,
1918.
Bühler, K., 'Die Krise der Psychologie', Kantstudien 31 (1926) 455-526.
Bühler, K., Die Krise der Psychologie, Gustav Fischer Verlag, lena, 1927.
BUhler, K., 'Displeasure and Pleasure in Relation to Activity', in Feelings and Emotions, Wittenberg Symposium, Clark University Press, Worcester, 1928.
Buhler, K., The Mental Development of the child, Harcourt, Brace and Co., New York,
1930.
BUhler, K., Ausdruckstheorie, Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena, 1933.
BUhler, K., Sprachtheorie, Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena, 1934.

Bullock, M., Austria 1918-1938: A Study in Failure, Macmillan and Co., London, 1939.
Burger, E., Arbeitspadagogik, Engelmann, Leipzig, 1923.
Carnap, R., 'Andere Seiten der Philosophie', in Club Voltaire, Jahrbuch für kritische
Aufklarung, Vol. III, Rowohlt Paperback, Munich, 1967.
Cox, Philip W. L., 'Austrian Teachers in the Crisis', Progressive Education 11 (1934)
360-368.
The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy (ed. by Mario Bunge), Free Press,
New York, 1964.

Dengler, Paul L., 'Creative Personality and the New Education', Progressive Education
6 (1929), 132-135.
Diamant, A., Austrian Catholics and the Social Question, University of Florida Press,
Gainesville, 1959.
Dottrens, R., The New Education in Austria, The John Day Co. New York, 1930.
'Educational Events: Summer School in Psychology at the University of Vienna',
School and Society 41 (1935) 284.
Engelmann, P., Letters from Ludwig Witigenstein, with a Memoir, Basil Blackwell,
Oxford, 1967.
Fadrus, V., Die Osterreichische Schulreform, Vienna, 1927.
Fadrus, V., 'Professor Dr. Karl Bühlers Wirken an der Wiener Universität', Wiener
Zeischrft für Philosophie, Psychologie, Padagogik 7 (1959) 3-25, Festgabe for Karl
BUhier's 80th birthday.

Feigi, H., 'The Wiener Kreis in America', Perspectives in American History 2 (1968)
630-673.
von Ficker, L., 'Rilke and der unbekannte Freund: In Memoriam Ludwig Wittgenstein', Der Brenner, Innsbruck 1954, pp. 234-248.
Fischl, H., Wesen und Werden der Schuireform in Osierreich, Vienna 1929.

Fogelin, R. J., 'Wittgenstein and Intuitionism', American Philosophical Quarterly 5
(1968).
Gldckel, 0., Das Tor der Zukunft, Vienna 1917.
Glhckel, 0., Die Osterreichische Schulreform, Verlag der Wiener Volksbuchhandlung,
Vienna, 1923.
Glöckel, 0., Die Wirksamkeit des Stadtschulrates, Vienna 1925.
Glockel, 0., Die Entwicklung des Wiener Schuiwesens, Vienna 1927.

Glhckel, 0., Drillschule, Lernschule, Arbeitsschule, Verlag der Organisation Wien der
Sozialdemokratischen Partei, Vienna, 1928.

334

W. W. BARTLEY, III

Gombrich, E. H. I., The Story of Art, Phaidon, London, 1958.
Gombrich, H. H. J., Art and Illusion, Phaidon, London, 1960.
Gomperz, H., Uber Sinn und Sinngebilde, Verstehen und Erkldren, J. C. B. Mohr,
Tubingen, 1929.

Gomperz, H., 'Karm die Deduktion zu 'neuen' Ergebnissen fuhren?', Kantstudien 35
(1930) 466-479.
Gomperz, H., Die Wissenschaft und die Tat, Gerold und Co., Vienna, 1934.
Gomperz, H., 'Philosophy in Austria during the last sixty Years', The Personalist 17
(1936) 307-311.
Gomperz, H., 'Interpretation', Erkenntnis 7 (1936) 225-232.
Gomperz, H., Interpretation: Logical Analysis of a Method of Historical Research,
Library of Unified Science, Monograph Series, No. 8-9, W. P. van Stockum en Zoon,
The Hague, 1939.

Gomperz, H., 'The Meaning of 'Meaning'', Philosophy of Science 8 (1941) 157-183.
Gomperz, H., 'Autobiographical Remarks', The Personalist 24 (1943) 254-270.
Gomperz, H., Philosophical Studies (ed. by Daniel S. Robinson, with foreword by
Philip Merlan), Christopher Publishing House, Boston, 1953.
Gulick, Ch. A., Austria from Habsburg to Hitler, University of California Press, Berkeley
and Los Angeles, 1948, two volumes.
Hansel, L., Die Jugend und die leibliche Liebe: Sexualpddagogische Betrachtungen,
Tyrolia Verlag, Innsbruck-Vienna-Munich, 1938.
Hansel, L., 'Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889-1951)', Wissenschaft imd Weltbild, Monatsschrift für alle Gebiete der Forschung 8 (1951) 315-323.
Hansel, L., Begegnungen und Auseinandersetzungen mit Denkern und Dichtern der
Neuzeit, Osterreichischer Bundesverlag für Unterricht, Vienna, 1957, pp. 315-323.
Hausmann, L., Wittgenstein als Volksschullehrer, typescript.

Herbert, J. F., Outlines of Educational Doctrine, Macmillan, New York, 1904.
Hon, F., 'School Reform in Austria', The Canadian Forum 11 (1930) 13-14.
Hudson, W. D., Ludwig Wittgenstein, John Knox Press, Richmond, 1968.
'100 Jahre Reichsvolksschulgesetz', Erziehung und Unterricht (1969).
Hunter, J. F. M., "Forms of Life' in Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations',
American Philosophical Quarterly 5 (1968).

Kaplan, B. and Wapner, S., (eds.) Perspectives in Psychological Theory, International
Universities Press, New York, 1960.
Katz, J. I., The Philosophy of Language, Harper and Row, New York, 1966.
Keyserling, A., Geschichte der Denkstile, Verlag der Palme, Vienna, 1968.
Koffka, K., The Growth of the Mind, Harcourt Brace and Co., New York, 1925.
Koffka, K., Principles of GestaltPsychology, Harcourt Braceand World, NewYork, 1935.
Köhler, W., Dynamics in Psychology, Washington Square Press, New York, 1965.
Kraft, V., The Vienna Circle, New York, 1953. The Philosophical Library.
Kulpe, 0., Introduction to Philosophy, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1927.
Kfilpe, 0., Outlines of Psychology, Swan Sonnenschein and Co., London, 1909.
Külpe, 0., Vorlesungen llber Psychologie, S. Hirzel, Leipzig, 1922.
Ktilpe, 0., Vorlesungen fiber Logik, S. Hirzel, Leipzig, 1923.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., 'Amerikanische Beobachtungen eines Buhler-Schfllers', Zeitschr(ft
exp. angew. Psychol. 6 (1959) 69-76.

Leinfellner, E., 'Zur nominalistischen Begrundung von Linguistik und Sprachphilosophie: Fritz Mauthner und Ludwig Wittgenstein', Studium Generale (1969) 209-251.
Lewin, K., A Dynamic Theory of Personality, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1935.

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

335

Lewin, K., Principles of Topological Psychology, McGraw-Hill paperbacks, New York,
1966.
London, K. L., 'Nazi Germany and the Austrian School System', The Educational
Record (1941) 170-178.
Lyford, G. L., 'Education in Eight European Cities', Childhood Education 6 (1930)
259-260.
Meister, R., 'Teacher Training inAustria', Harvard EducationalReview 8(1938)112-121.
Methlagl, W. and Rochelt, H., 'Das Portrãt: Ludwig Wittgenstein zur 80. Widerkehr
seines Geburtstages', broadcast over Radio Tirol, Osterreichischer Rundfunk, 1969.
Meyer, A., Modern European Educators, Prentice Hall, New York, 1934, pp.99-160.
Naess, A., Four Modern Philosophers, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1968.
'The Nazis and their Subjugated Neighbors', School and Society 52 (1940) 625.
Neurath, 0., 'Die Padagogische Weitbedeutung der Bildstatistik nach Wiener Methode',
Die Quelle, 1933.

'Obituary for Ludwig Wittgenstein', in Die Presse, Vienna, 6 May 1951, p. 51.
Pears, D. F., 'The Development of Wittgenstein's Philosophy,' The New York Review
of Books (January 16, 1969), 21-30.
Piaget, J., Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood, William Heinemann Ltd., London,
1951.
Piaget, J., The Child's Conception of Number, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., London,
1952.
Piaget, J., The Origins of Intelligence in Children, International Universities Press, New
York, 1956.
Pitcher, G., The Philosophy of Wittgenstein, Prentice-Hail, Englewood Cliffs, 1964, pp.
6-9.
Popper, Karl R., 'Uber die Steilung des Lehrers zu Schule and Schiller', Schulreform
4 (1925) 204ff.
Popper, Karl R., 'Zur Philosophie des Heimatgedankens', Die Quelle 77 (1927) 899ff.
Popper, Karl R., 'Die Gedächtnispflege unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Selbsttatigkeit',
Die Quelle 81 (1931) 607ff.
Popper, Karl R., 'Padagogische Zeitschriftenschau', Die Quelle 82 (1932) 301, 580, 646,
712, 778, 846, 930.
Popper, Karl R., 'The Demarcation between Science and Metaphysics', in Conjectures
and Refutations, Basic Books, New York, 1963.
Popper, Karl R., 'Language and the Body-Mind Problem', in Conjectures and Refutations, Basic Books, New York, 1963.
Popper, Karl R., The Open Society and Its Enemies, Harper Torchbooks, New York,
1963, two volumes.
Popper, Karl R., 'Philosophy of Science: A Personal Report', in British Philosophy in
the Mid-Century (ed. by C. A. Mace), Allen and Unwin, London, 1957, and in Conjectures and Refutations, Basic Books, New York, 1963.
Popper, Karl R., 'Towards a Rational Theory of Tradition', in Conjectures and Refutations, Basic Books, New York, 1963.
Popper, Karl R., The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Harper Torchbooks, New York,
1964.
Popper, Karl R., The Poverty of Historicism, Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1964.
Popper, Karl R., Conjectures and Refutations, Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1968.
Scheibenreif, F., Orts- und Hauschronik von Trattenbach, Gemeindeamt Trattenbach:
Im Selbstverlag and Kommissions-Verlag, Druck: K. MUhlberger, Neunkirchen, 1934.

337

W. W. BARTLEY, III

THEORY OF LANGUAGE: WITTGENSTEIN AND POPPER

Schneider, W., '100 Jabre Reichsvolksschulgesetz und Schulaufsicht im Schu1bk
Neunkirchen', Erziehung und Unterricht, May 1969.

Blackwell, Oxford, 1958.
Wittgenstein, L., Philosophical Investigations, Basil
(ed. by Cyril Barrett), University of
Wittgen5tei11, L., Lectures and Conversations
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1967.

336

Schwab, J. J., 'On the Corruption of Education by Psychology', Ethics 68 (1957)
Schwendt, J., Schule im Wald: Trattenbach, Dorf am Wechsel, Trattenbach 1966.
Siegi, M. H., Reform of Elementary Education in Austria, New York 1933.

Smital, 0., 'Eine Stimme aug Wien: Ludwig Wittgenstein', Broadcast, Osterreichjscher
Rundfunk, 19 September 1968.
Smoor, M. P., 'Impressions of the Schools of Austria', The High School Teacher (1930)
417-8.
Spiegelberg, H., 'The Puzzle of Wittgenstein's Phanomenologie', American Philosophical
Quarterly 5 (1968).

Steiner, G., Language and Silence, Atheneum, New York, 1970.
Stern, J. P., Lichtenberg: A Doctrine of Scattered Occasions, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, 1959.

Tesar, L. E., 'Die Schulreform in Osterreich', in Handbuch der Pt1dagogik, H. Nohi,
L. Pallat, Vol. IV, 1928.
Tumlirz, 0., 'Austrian Education in the Past Fifteen Years', School and Society 41
(1935) 197-203.
Vossler, K., Sprachphilosophie, Max Hueber, Munich, 1923.
Vygotsky, L. S., Thought and Language, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, and
the MIT Press 1962.
Waismann, F., Wittgenstein und der Wiener Kreis (ed. by B. F. McGuinness), Basil
Blackwell, Oxford, 1967,
Walker, J., 'Wittgenstein's Earlier Ethics', American Philosophical Quarterly 5 (1968).
Way, L., Adler's Place in Psychology, Collier Books, New York, 1962.
Wein, H., Sprachphilosophie der Gegenwart, Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, 1963.
Wellek, A., 'Em Dritteljahrhundert nach BUhler's 'Krise der Psychologie", Zeitschrift
für experimentelle und angewandte Psychologie 6 (1959) 109-117.
Wellek, A., 'Karl Buhler 1879-1963', Archly für die gesa,nte Psychologie 116 (1964).
Wellek, A., 'The Impact of German Immigration on the Development of American.
Psychology', Journal of the History of the Behavioural Sciences 4 (1968) 207-229.
Welimer, A., Methodologie als Erkenntnistheorie: Zur Wissenschaftslehre Karl R.
Poppers, Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt a. M., 1967.
Werner, H. Comparative Psychology of Mental Development, Follett Publishing Company, Chicago, 1948.
Werner, H., (ed.) On Expressive Language, Clark University Press, Worcester, 1955.
Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung: Der Wiener Kreis, Arthur Wolf Verlag, Vienna, 1929.
'Wittgenstein's Lectures on Ethics', The Philosophical Review 74 (1965) 3-26. Also
printed in Neue Zürcher Zeitung, and in Conceptus 2 (1968).
Ludwig Wittgenstein The Philosophical Investigations (ed. by George Pitcher), Doubleday New York 1966.
Ludwig Wittgenstein.' The Man and His Philosophy (ed. by K. T. Fann), Dell Publishing
Co., New York, 1967.

'A Wittgenstein Miscellany', in The American Philosophical Quarterly (ed. by Nicholas
Rescher) 5 (1968).
Wittgenstein, L., Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.

Wittgenstein, L., Wbrterbuch für Volksschulen, Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky A. G., Vienna
1926.
Wittgenstein, L., The Blue and Brown Books, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1958.

University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1967.
Wittgensteifl, L., Zettel,
Struktur
and
Sprachspiel bet Wittgenstein, Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt,
Wuchterl, K.,
1969.

Zilsel, E., 'Kant als Erzieher', Schulreform 3 (1924) 182ff.

Amtlicher Bericht des Stadtschulrates für Wien.
Deutsche Erziehung (ed. by Max Fritz), Vienna.

Der Neue Weg (ed by Leopold Lang and Ludwig Battista).
padagogisches Jahrbuch (ed. by Wiener Padagogischen Gesellschaft).
Die Quelle (ed. by Eduard Burger), Vienna.
Schulreforni, Haase Verlag, Vienna.
Die Volkserziehung, Nachrichteri des Bundesministeriums für Unterricht.
Volksbildung, Zeitschrift für die Forderung des VolksbildungsWesens in Osterreich (ed.
by Max Mayer).

