CPi'

//

I

I
WitIam W Bartley

Un fathomed Knowledge,.
Unmeasured Wealth: On
Universities and the Wealth of
Nations.
Open Court 1990.

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS
OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS:
THE WITTGENSTEINIAN PROBLEMATIC AND
JUSTIFICATIONISM'

In counterpart to these attempts to reconstitute a unified
epistemological field, we find at regular intervals the
affirmation of an impossibility.
Michel Foucault2
If the logical structure of existing knowledge is one of
distinct, unique, irreducible forms, it cannot readily be
regarded as a unity, but neither is it a chaos.
Paul H. Hirst5

1. An Approach to a Chasm
Many things create the deep divide between Popper's approach
and that of the philosophical profession, and their very different
responses to the crises reviewed in chapters 10 and 11. Some, as we
have seen, are historical, psychological, social, even personal. Quite
apart from any evaluation of his work in philosophy of physics,
physics itself, and epistemology, Popper's outspoken opposition to
Freudian and Marxist thought, and to Zionism, would be sufficient
to antagonise a large percentage of the American academic community. If one focuses on such issues, the opposition may appear
hostile, partisan, and irrational. So it sometimes is. But there are
theoretical reasons for the split too: intellectually, Popper and most
professional philosophers have fundamentally different points of
view.
These differences can be put briefly, but will take some pages to
explain. Whereas most professional philosophers, following Wittgenstein, compartmentalise knowledge and take the view that the

An early version of this chapter appeared in The Division of Knowledge, Chapter 5 of
CenLripetal Forces in the Sciences, ed. Gerard Radnitzky (New York: Paragon House 1987), pp. 67102.
2 The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences (New York: Random House, 1970),
p. 246. See also his The Archeology of Knowledge (London: Tavistock Publications, 1972) esp.
chapter 6.
P. H. Hirst, Knowledge and the Curriculum (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974), p.
137.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

scope of rationality is severely limited, Popper does neither, and
instead offers a universal theory of unlimited rational criticism. But
this is only the beginning of the story-a story essentially about the
ideas of Popper and Wittgenstein.
Popper and Wittgenstein, two native Viennese who made their
philosophical careers in Britain: they are the two figures that dominate philosophical discussion. They are the only two philosophers
today whose ideas are said to have a transformative impact on
contemporary philosophical thought in the sense that they mark a
watershed, that they sever the before from the after, that they are
revolutionary, or involve a "paradigm shift". Thus H. L. Finch has
described Wittgenstein as "the first philosopher who is really outside
of modern philosophy", as one who "stands at the beginning of a
new period in Western philosophy".4 Whereas Gerard Radnitzky,
denying Finch's claim, contends that it is Popper's thought that
"constitutes a Copernican turn".5
Radnitzky would say that what Finch wrote about Wittgenstein is
really true about Popper. And vice versa. The followers of each of
these thinkers tend to deny that there is anything transformative or
revolutionary or "paradigm-shifting" about the thought of the other
figure. Popperians tend to share with Bertrand Russell the view that
the thought of the later Wittgenstein is that of one who "seems to
have grown tired of serious thinking and to have invented a doctrine which would make such an activity unrecessary".° Wittgensteinians, on the other hand, consider Popper to be superficial. I was
dining with an American Wittgensteinian philosopher who registered
some dismay when I told him that, having written a book on
Wittgenstein,7 I was now writing a book on Popper. "How can you
do that?", he demanded. "Popper is of course quite talented, but
Wittgenstein is deep." More recently, I was sitting at the Athenaeum
in London, talking with Sir Isaiah Berlin, who has always been

Henry Leroy Finch, Wittgenstezn-The Later Philosophy (New York: Humanities Press, 1977),
PP. vii-Viii.

Gerard Radnitzky, "Popper as a 'Fuming Point in the Philosophy of Science: Beyond
Foundationalism and Relativism, in Paul Levinson, In Pursuit of Thuth, op. cit., pp. 64-80. See also
Radnitzky's 'Disappointment and Changes in the Conception of Rationality: Wittgenstein and
Popper", in The Search for Absolute Values and the Creation of the New World: Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences (New York: ICF Press, 1982), pp. 1193-1233.
Bertrand Russell, My Philosophical Development (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1959), p.
161.
See my Wittgen.stein, 2nd edition, op. cit.
212

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

friendly toward Popper and appreciated him. He gave me an
example of a clever image that Wittgenstein had once made in
conversation. "As you can see by that", Berlin said, "Wittgenstein
was a genius. Popper unfortunately is no genius". I did not see at
all.
Considered from a Wittgensteinian perspective (or from that of
Kuhn), such mutual lack of comprehension and appreciation might
be expected in any clash of alternative and incommensurable paradigms, world views, or as Wittgenstein puts it, "forms of life".
W'ittgensteinians see such incommensurability everywhere. Popper
does not.
In this chapter and the next I shall attempt to penetrate these
alleged paradigmatic barriers, and to identify both the underlying
differences separating the work of Popper and Wittgenstein, and the
original contributions, if any, ..that each makes. That I myself am not
impartial need not prevent me from showing how an impartial
comparison might be made-and that these positions are, thus, not
incommensurable.
Someone may protest that I have not seen Kuhn's point, and
thus am trying to compare the incommensurable. To see Kuhn's
point and to accept it are, however, two different things. Kuhn's
point is made from within the Wittgensteinian problematic. To
accept it in advance of investigation is simply to concede the argument to Wittgenstein. Popperians do not deny the possibility of
incommensurability: the question is whether his and Wittgenstein's
doctrines really fall into this category. This question can be investigated by anyone-not just by a Popperian.

2. Tenets/ Problematic! Research Program! Structure
How then do the differences between Popper and Wittgenstein
come about? Professional philosophy is, I contend, rooted in what I
call the "Wittgensteinian problematic" and in "justificationism". The
first forces the compartmentalisation of knowledge, and the second
forces the limitation of rationality. But Popper undermines the
Wittgensteinian problematic and, unlike most philosophers (including
Wittgenstein), takes a nonjustificational approach.
I announce all this-a way of describing the situation which will
sound strange to some readers and which needs to be explained in
detail-as a foretaste of what is to follow. Before presenting my own
213

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

account, I shall first summarise my view of the logic of the situadott
to be examined and introduce some useful terminology
Central to my argument will be what I have Just called the
Wittgensteinian problematic, something that hardly anyone knows
about. By "problematic" I have in mind a "particular way of posing
problems": that is, a way of selecting, consciously or unconsciously5
the types, interrelations, and priorities of problems that must be
solved. Also included in the problematic is the history of attempts to
solve, and failure to solve, those problems. All this may include a
network of background influences and assumptions available as one
builds one's outlook, and that also limit the directions in which one
may build.
Philosophers who are led into Wittgensteinian thought, and into
professional philosophy generally, by such a problematic, easily
become trapped in its grip, and forced into predictable positions by
it. "One's point of view is the point from which one views and
which one therefore does not see." True. But it is common experience that when someone points out one's point of view, one has at
least an opportunity to examine it-seeing it perhaps for the first
time. By highlighting the main components of the Wittgensteinian
e ey issues, te w ere rational
point o view, we
rgument might be relevantly an e ectively applied, and thus get
on with what science has always been concerned with, and often
successfully achieves: the measurement and comparison of what at
first appears to be incommensurable.8
A "problematic" is one of the things to be considered when trying
to do this. But it is not the only thing. Indeed, when examining
philosophies, one has to attend to at least four overlapping aspects:
(a) their tenets and the problems they claim to have solved; (b)
their problematic context; (c) their research programs9; and (d) their
structure)° These aspects may not be equally well known or equally

See K. R. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, op. cit., vol. i • pp. 248-253, and
Conjectures and Refutations, op. cit., chapter 2.
i use the term "research program" in the sense given by Popper in the "Metaphysical
Epilogue" to his Postscript to the Logic of Scien1fic Discovery, vol. 3, Quantum Theory and the Schism in
Physics, op. cit. This idea was popularised. and given a somewhat different sense, by the late Imre
Lakatos, for which see his The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes, op. cit., and my chapter
i8 beiow.
° By "structure" here is meant nothing mysterious-only certain features of a philosophy,
such as justificationism, which predetermine the kinds of questions asked and limit the range of
answers deemed appropriate.
214

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMFTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

influential. Thus one philosopher's influence may stem chiefly from
the problems he or she has solved, whereas the influence of another
philosopher-who may indeed not even have solved any
problem-may come chiefly from a research program that he or she
las initiated.
Popperian philosophy is oriented towards the first aspect: it is
oriented to theories and problems. I can briefly specify Popper's
position in the history of thought and indicate my own relationship
to him in three sentences: with his theory of falsiflability, he solved
the problem of induction and made an ingenious, if somewhat less
satisfactory, solution of the problem of demarcation. By generalising
and somewhat correcting his theory of demarcation (or criticism),
one can solve the problems of scepticism, fideism, and rationality."
The result is that traditional, epistemology and much of the rest of
traditional philosophy become obsolete.
Popper's own problematic-the nexus of influences, assumptions,
and problems that he exploited to build his philosophical outlook-cannot so readily be summarised unless one is already informed of the necessary historical background. But much of this is
readily available in his own work and in that of others, and what is
not available is in preparation.'2
With Wittgenstein, the situation is different. It is hard to identify
any philosophical problem that he can be said to have solved, or
any new philosophical theory that he propounded.'3 If one turns to
his early work, to the Tractatu Logico-Philosophicus (1921), one must
qualify this judgement a bit, for there he did attempt to dispense
with Russell's theory of types by arguing that to know the sense of
a symbol definitely and completely one needs to know all its possible combinations, and that one thus need not also state its range of
applicability. This view impressed Russell, and was, as he cautiously
stated in his Preface to the Tractatus in 1922, "not at any point

See my "Rationality, Criticism, and Logic", op. cit.; "Rationality versus the Theory of
Rationality", op. cit.; and The Retreal to Commitment, op. cit.
2 See K. R. Popper, Unended Quest, op. cit.; my "Theory of Language and Philosophy of
Science as Instruments of Educational Reform', 01). cit.; coy Wittgen.stein, op. cit.; and my "Em
Schwieriger Mensch", op. cit. I am, as mentioned, at present writing Popper's biography, in which
I attempt to reconstruct his own problematic or 'Problemsteliung'. Popper's large Archive of
manuscripts and correspondence, incidentally, is deposited in the Archive of the Hoover
Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, Stanford University.
IS See my Wiugenstein, second edition, op. cit. The most up-to-date account of my views on
Wittgenstein is contained in the Japanese translation of this book (lbkyo: Miraishi, 1990).
215

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

obviously wrong". It was, however, refuted by the work of Alonzo
Church and Kurt Gödel in the 1930s.'4
Much of Wittgenstein's influence stems, rather, from the research
program inspired by his later philosophy-a program that I shall
discuss below.
Yet the key to the persistence of Wittgensteinian philosophy (and
the appeal of his research program) within professional philosophy
lies neither in his views nor in his research program. It is the two
other aspects (b and d, their problematic content and their structure) that account for this, and which divide his thought from
Popper's.
The first of these aspects is contextual: it is the relatively unrecognised Wittgensteinian problematic, which, although rarely
articulated, is distinctively, although not uniquely, Wittgensteinian.
Indeed, the manner and context in which followers of Wittgenstein
pose their questions is rarely discussed. An approach to philosophical problems which is very characteristic yet neither unique nor fully
recognised distinguishes Wittgenstein's followers.
The second aspect (to be examined in the following chapter) is
structural, and comes from "justiflcationism"-something that, again,
while not distinctively Wittgensteinian (since he shares it, after all,
with most other philosophers who also have never felt the impact of
Darwin-i.e., with most contemporary philosophers) is prominent in
his On Certainty and is indeed to be found throughout his work.'5
These two matters-the Wittgensteinian problematic and justificationism-are closely interwoven; the themes of one recur in the
other, and an examination of both is needed to answer the questions of this chapter.

3. The Wittgensteinian Problematic

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

then philosophy may take the path that most professionals, following
Wittgenstein, have staked out. If Popper has, as he claims, solved
the problem of induction-and if the key to his solution is the
nonjustificational character of his approach-then professional
Wittgensteinian philosophy is a mistake, and continued mining of
that vein is wasted effort.
The issue is then not just one of fashion or power or influence;
certainly it transcends sociology. What is at stake is not the sort of
thing that Bertrand Russell seemed to have in mind when he wrote
of his displacement by the Wittgensteinians: "It is not an altogether
pleasant experience to find oneself regarded as antiquated after
having been, for a time, in the fashion. It is difficult to accept this
experience gracefully."6
Russell's experience, as reported in this remark, both caters to
and lies outside the Wittgensteinian problematic. Russell could not
solve, and did not claim satisfactorily to have solved, the problem of
induction, even though he was preoccupied with it throughout his
life.'7 Both Wittgensteinian and Popperian philosophy, by contrast,
begin with the conviction-the correct conviction-that the problem
is insoluble in Russellian terms, and proceed from there. From the
Wittgensteinian and the Popperian viewpoints, Russell's work is antiquated. Yet both Wittgenstein and Russell are justificationists'5,
whereas Popper is not.
If we reconstruct historically the problem Situation that leads to
the development of contemporary professional philosophy, it becomes evident how the entire development hinges on the assumpdon that the problem of induction cannot be solved. After doing
this, we can see how different the entire matter looks from a
perspective within which the problem of induction has been solved.
I proceed in this way because most professionals come in-and
settle in-in the middle of the story, as it were, and never have the
opportunity to look at the development as a whole, or to consider it
as something that was anything but necessary or desirable.

One problem-and only one-lies at the root both of the Wittgensteinian problematic and of justificationism. This is the old
problem of induction. If the problem of induction remains insoluble,

To generate our problem situation, we need a scientific imperialism
of the sort available in logical positivism and in most other evalua-

Ludwig Wittgenstein, llactatu.s Logico-Philosophicus (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1922). See the discussion in my Wittgenstein, op. cit., chapter 2, sections 9-10; see also James
Griffin, Wittgen.stein's Logical Atomism (Seattle: University of washington Press, 1964).
" See Radnitzky and Bartley, Evolutionary Epistemology, Rationality, and the Sociology of Knowledge, op. cit., especially chapter 1.

6 Bertrand Russell My Philosophical Develojnnent, op. cit., p. 159.
See Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (London: Williams and Norgate, 1912), and most of
his later writings in the theory of knowledge.
' See my discussion of Russell in The Retreat to Commitment, op. cit., Appendix 2.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

tional programs chiefly concerned to demarcate science from othe;
areas (see chapter 10). Wittgenstein's later philosophy was created h
specific opposition to the positivist doctrine about the unity of th
sciences, according to which all legitimate utterances are to b
judged in terms of the canons of science-"science" being under
stood in a positivist sense.
The positivist approach had been intended to provide a unity tc
intellectual endeavour. For example, the notion that sense observa.
tion is the foundation of all legitimate discourse provides a universal
theory of criticism and explanation of error. If observation is the only
true source of knowledge, and if reports of sense observation serve
as the only legitimate premisses in valid argument, their truth will
be-in accordance with elementary logic-transmitted to the conclusion of that argument. Thus, any legitimate (i.e., properly sourced
or justified) statement would be one logically derived from, and
justified in terms of, such true observational premisses. Whereas an
unacceptable theory would be one that could not be so derived.
Hence the main source of error would lie in accepting a position
not logically derivable from sense observation reports.
But this approach, as we have seen, is untenable. Its propo
nents-from Hume to present-day philosophers-are confronted by
insuperable difficulties. Many legitimate scientific claims cannot be
justified in the way demanded. Every universal law of nature is
logically too strong to function as the conclusion of a valid argument whose only premisses are sense observation reports. There is
no way logically to reach from a finite set of such reports as prernisses to a universal law of nature as conclusion. And the problem is
larger: not only are scientific laws not derivable from sense observation reports; various principles often supposed, particularly by
positivists, to be indispensable to science-e.g., principles of induction, verification, and causality-also cannot be so derived.
Thus the particular principle of criticism that had been advanced,
far from being universal, does not work at all. Moreover, its failure
suggested that any relationship between evidence and conclusion
must be illogical: that illogic lies at the heart of science.
There is nothing distinctively Wittgensteinian about this result.
Such a "difficulty", such an epistemological crisis, has occurred
repeatedly in philosophy. The crisis created by Hume's work in the
eighteenth century is, in essentials, identical to the one that logical
positivists faced in the twentieth century-which is, in the main, the

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

ancient sceptical crisis recorded by Sextus Empiricus, and the crise
pyrrhonienne that Descartes attempted unsuccessfully to resolve in the
seventeenth century.'9
What is distinctively Wittgensteinian is, rather, an extension of the
strategy commonly adopted to resolve this crisis.
To understand Wittgenstein's contribution, we need first to look
at the pre-Wittgensteinian, "unextended" strategy. The most common way of resolving this sort of epistemological crisis, from Hume
onwards, had been the following. It had been asserted, often triumphantly, and even as if profoundly, that the relationship between
evidence and conclusion is not illogical, only non-logical. That is,
there must be two kinds of inference: deductive, which defines logic;
and inductive, which defines the natural sciences. Induction, it was
conceded, is indeed not deductive, but it was insisted that there is
no need for it to be so, and that induction is yet not illogical.
"Everything is what it is and not another thing."2° The whole
epistemological "crisis" was hence, it was alleged, a mere "pseudoproblem" artificially created by the unwarranted (imperialistic)
assumption that canons of science must conform to canons of logic.
Instead of being a faulty sort of deduction, induction is fundamental, defining science-just as deduction is fundamental, defining
logic. Thus the problem of induction is "dissolved" by learning not
to apply the standards of deductive logic to judge inductive inference.2' Wittgenstein later approvingly (if obliquely) echoed the old
strategy: "Here grounds are not propositions which logically imply
what is believed . . . the question here is not one of an approximation to logical inference."22
At least part of the task of the philosopher, then, is-while eschewing judgement-simply to describe and clarify the standards or
principles of deductive and of inductive reasoning, as they are
embedded in actual practice. And to do so is to make clear that there is
no way to unify the principles of these two domains. I have emphasised
the last sentence to stress that the initial and crucial sundering of
the old doctrine of the unity of the sciences already occurs at this
point. But the sundering may be passed over quietly or even go

See the reference to the work of R. H. Popkin, given in the following chapter.
Bishop Butler, as quoted in G. E. Moore's epigraph to Principia Ethica.
See Hilary Putnam's remark, quoted above.
Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical lnve.ctigalions (Oxford: Blackwell, 1953), paras. 481.

219

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

unnoticed. For most positivists, although accepting the division,
between deductive and inductive reasoning, nonetheless continued tG
maintain the unity of the sciences They maintained that is that the
sciences consist of all and only those activities that operate strictly in
terms of either deduction or induction or both It is at this stage in
the argument that Wittgenstein really enters the picture
Here the Wittgensteinian extension is introduced The resulting
new development not only threatens the old doctrine of the unity of
the sciences it also no longer leaves room to patch up or ignore its
gaps as had been done with the cleavage between deduction and
induction; and it rules out in advance any new unified account of
science or knowledge.
This extension begins with a simple question. Why not extend the
previous strategy a step further? For there exist other disciplines and
"forms of life" whose principles are neither logical nor scientific-neither deductive nor inductive. There are, for instance,
history and jurisprudence and religion and politics. Practitioners of
such disciplines are often criticised by reference to logical and
scientific standards. Yet if logic cannot be permitted to judge science, why should science or logic be permitted to judge other forms
of life? Why eliminate only the imperialism of deductive logic? Why
not eliminate the imperialism of inductive logic as well?
An answer is quickly provided. Under the approach stemming
from the later writings of Wittgenstein,23 each discipline or field or
"language game" or "form of life" is alleged to have its own ungrounded ultimate standards or principles or "logic", embedded in
action,24 which need not conform to or be reducible to any other
standards, and which, again, it is the special task of the philosopher
to describe and clarif' but to eschew judging or defending. As Wittgenstein says: "As if giving grounds did not come to an end sometime. But the end is not an ungrounded presupposition; it is an ungrounded way of acting."25

4. Weighty Consequences: The Task of Philosophy is to Describe the Principles of the Fragmented: The Division of Knowledge

Or of Hirst (see chapter i5 below).
24 See Hilary Putnam, The Corroboration of Theories', in P. A. Schilpp, ed,, The Philosophy
of Karl Popper, op. cit.
25 wittgenstcin, On Certainty (Oxford: Blackwe!l, 1969), para. I iQ.

This simple-and, ironically enough, apparently logical-extension
has immediate and weighty consequences. It literally means that
there is no arguing or judging among disciplines-or different
activities, or forms of life-any more. Not only is there no longer a
universal theory of criticism; there is no longer room even for crossdisciplinary criticism. Logic cannot judge science; or science, history;
or history, religion. And so on. There is no unity to knowledge-or
science. Rather, all knowledge is essentially divided. There is a
spangled diversity. Scientific imperialism makes way for disciplinary
independence-some might say anarchy-and to the natural division
of knowledge. Preservation of a minimum of "Two Cultures" is
underwritten by professional philosophy, and the existing fragmentation of both university and larger community is given a theoretical
justification. In this theoretical justification itself resides all that
remains of unity and community. Furthermore, the fragmentation is
noncompetitive, non-threatening, since no one segment may censure
any other.26 Indeed, everyone acquires total protection, freedom
from competition, on any fundamental issue. (Other consequences
are the special conception of the task of philosophy that was mentioned above, and the generation of the research program that
dominates Wittgensteinian philosophy, to which we shall return
below.)
To be sure, philosophers may still search for error. But it is a
new sort of error. Now the chief source of philosophical error is to
apply the rules of one activity, of one "language game", to another,
and, intentionally or not, to engage in judgement. Language trespasses its limits when expressions are used outside their proper
range of application-e.g., in criticism or evaluation of another form
of life, another language game. Philosophical critique is no longer of
content but of criteria application. On this view, positivist philosophy
as a whole-censorious and anti-metaphysical as it was-may be
regarded as, at least in this respect, a grand "category mistake", that
of supposing that different forms of knowledge must satisfy the
criteria of one supremely authoritative form of knowledge: science.
Yet there is nothing wrong, so it is contended, with a positivistic

op. cit.
' See the introduction to the second edition of my The Retreat to Commitment,
221

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

empiricism within proper limits: positivism is all right for science in so
far as it states the "inductive" principles behind the shared practices
of the scientific community.
In the course of this argument, the task of philosophy has been
redelineated. Contemplating the collapse of the universal claims of
the positivist theory of criticism, philosophers reached the conclusion
that any general philosophical theory of criticism is impossible. As a
consequence, criticism, evaluation, and explanation would no longer
be proper philosophical aims. Description, on the other hand, is not
simply part of the philosophical task; it is now virtually all that
remains to the philosopher. All that remains is to describe the logics
or grammars or first principles of various kinds of discourse and
activity, and the many different sorts of language games and forms
of life in which they are embedded. Foucault, who is very close to
Wittgenstein in his presuppositions, is right: what is involved is a
Sort of archaeology.

5. Research Programs
A new explanation of error often leads to a program of reform
aimed to prevent such errors from reappearing. So it is here.
Wittgenstein himself never claimed that all identifiable disciplines
and activities are separate language games, each with its own rules.
Some of his followers (such as Paul Hirst to whose ideas we shall
turn below) are careful to say that existing disciplines only tend to
be distinct "forms of knowledge".27 But many other Wittgensteinians
have gone much farther, suggesting that virtually every distinguishable activity-law, history, science, logic, ethics, politics, religion
-has its own specific grammar or logic, that mixing the grammar
of one of them with that of another leads to philosophical error,
and that it is the new job of the philosopher-his new research program28 under the Wittgensteinian dispensation-to describe in detail

" See Paul H. Hirst, Knowledge and the Curriculum, op. cit., p. 135. See also Paul H. Hirst and
K. S. Peters, The Logic of Education (New York: The Humanities Press, 1971); Paul H. Hint,
"Liberal Education and the Nature of Knowledge", in R. F. Dearden, P H. Hirst, and K. S.
Peters, Education and Reason (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972).
25
The word "research" should be taken lightly. Genuine research, advancing knowledge,
does more than grindingly apply a central theme to various areas. On "research programs" see K.
K. Popper, "Metaphysical Epilogue" to Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics, op. cit.; and also
chapter 18 below.

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

these separate logics or grammars. In this spirit three generations of
British and American professional philosophers came to write books
with titles such as The Vocabulary of Politics, The Language of Morals,
The Logic of Historical Explanation, The Language of [Literary] Criticism,
The Language of Fiction, The Uses of Argument, The Logic of the Social
Sciences, The Logic of the Sciences, The Province of Logic, The Language of
Education, The Logic of Education, The Logic of Religious Language, Faith
and Logic, Christian Discourse, The Language of Christian Belief The Logic
of Colour Words, and so on ad nanseam.
Any philosopher, even a novice, was thus provided with a simple
"research formula" whereby a book or learned paper could be
produced: "Take one of the phrases 'The Logic of x,' 'The Language of x,' or 'The Grammar of x,' substitute for x some activity or
discipline such as just named; write a treatise on the topic so
created." The ease with which such programs could be executed
further aided the practical success of such philosophising-as witness
to which each of the titles cited has decorated a book or monograph actually published.29 The Wittgensteinian research program, in
short, was useful to professional philosophers; it had what Gilbert
Ryle, following William James, called "cash value". And it was
generated immediately from the assumptions of the Wittgensteinian
problematic.3°

See my Wittgenstein, pp. 167-170, or (second edition, op. cit.), pp. 144-145.
'° In my "Achilles, the Tortoise, and Explanation in Science and in History", British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, May 1962, 1 examine one product of the application of this research
program: the debate about historical explanation. In the light of the Wittgensteinian problematic,
readers will be able to appreciate more fully why that debate-often called the "covering law
model" debate-was one of the most intense controversies in professional philosophy during the
late 1950s and early 1960s. It was a test case. The debate, it will be recalled, concerned whether
Popper's model of scientific explanation (also referred to as the "Popper-Hempel model" or the
"covering law model") could be applied, as Popper and C. G. Hempel maintained, to explanation
in historical writing as well as to explanation in physics and other sciences. This debate was
peculiar for several reasons: (a) because of the large numbers of philosophers independently
attracted to it; (b) because it was a pseudo-debate, depending almost entirely on misreadings of
what Popper and Hempel had actually written, and on a string of non sequiturs; and (c) because
the issues involved were intrinsically not very important: what Popper says about historical
explanation is trivially correct-and rather unenlightening about the actual practice of historical
investigation.
This debate can be understood only within the wider context of the Wittgensteinian problematic. If it is assumed that standards of inference must be field-dependent and not universal, then
any important standard-setting feature of investigative activity in any area-and certainly so
important a feature as explanation-that purported to be universal, applying to all fields, would
pose a challenge. Hence the debate over the covering law model was really an attempt (an
attempt contemptuous of the facts and of what was written) to show that explanation must be
field-dependent too. What was really involved-though I do not believe anyone mentioned it-was
the a priori rejection of the contention that a model of scientific explanation could apply anywhere
except in the strictest scientific undertaking-for anything else would have to have a different
223

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

6. Further Consequences and Reactions
The essentials of the Wittgensteinian problematic have now been
set down, but some important matters have not yet been mentioned.
There is, for instance, the way in which the whole line of thinking
was reinforced by positive reactions on the part of other disciplines-especially those that had previously been under siege.
Take religion as an example. One can find in much philosophy
of religion of the past sixty years a development parallel to that in
professional philosophy. Traditional apologetic philosophy of religion
had also been imperialistic, insisting that findings in other areas of
human life at least conform to those of religion. With the theologian
Karl Barth, however, one finds a reversal of that strategy. Barth
rejects apologetic theology and substitutes for it kerygmatic theology,
wherein the job of the theologian is simply to describe the ultimate
presuppositions of Christianity. Consequently, it is hardly surprising
that philosophy of religion and philosophical theology have been
given a new lease on life by the Wittgensteinian problematic. For
the self-conception of such disciplines now matches the typical professiond
Wittgensteinian characterisation of the way all disciplines and ways of life
must be.
Another important element in the problem situation should also
be noted. Psychological and sociological in character, it provides
what amounts to a recipe for generating' team-style departments of
philosophy, in which one professional does logic, another does
science, and so on-where "does" means "describes the logical structure, the 'grammar' of' various established fields. The characteristic
activities of old-fashioned positivism may even remain here: that is,
formalism and the descriptive analysis of the methods and presuppositions of the natural sciences and logic. What must be sacrificed
are not such activities (in which individual academics may have
heavily invested in terms of formal training) but the positivistic
tendency to censure other forms of life. A "live and let live" attitude
arises-subsumed under a common paradigm or point of view from
which it is assumed that the problem of induction is a pseudoproblem, insoluble on its own terms.

logic". Consequently this debate produced no serious investigations of historical narrative, but
only disguised and misplaced polemics against what was conceived as scientific imperialism.
Sl See The
Retreai €o Gammiment, 2nd edition, op. cit., pp. 124-133. See also Antony Flew and
Alasdair Macintyre, eds., New Essays in Philosophical Theology (London: Macmillan, 1955), chapter 1.

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

Thus it is that Ludwig Wittgenstein, for all his trials and tribulations, never had to battle for recognition-for he, like Kuhn, told the
professionals what they wanted to hear. It is consoling for "specialists"
isolated from the wider culture to be reassured that it is all right
merely to "do their thing". It is consoling for them-ironically,
through "team work" with colleagues-to believe that there is no
alternative to continuing to destroy rather than to create community, and that their own particular usage and activity, whatever it may
be, is indeed authoritative.32 I wrote in Parts I and II of the creation of intellectual cartels-a phenomenon not restricted to the
profession of philosophy. Here, in the underlying abstractions of contemporaiy philosophy, one finds a theoretical defense of such cartels and of
protectionism-a ready-made ideology to defend such cartels (although, needless to say, these words are not used and these parallels are not drawn).
Yet, ironically latent in this theoretical justification of fragmentation and protectionism, is a new imperialism, generally unarticulated, according to which disciplines or forms of life must conform. True
forms of life (a) must not judge one another; and (b) must not try
to describe some common world in collaboration with other disciplines since each form of life creates its own world. In this generally
agreed theoretical justification itself resides all that remains of unity.
Popper's approach does not conform to either of these principles.
Hence he and his students are not simply followers of a different way of life,
to be treated tolerantly like all the rest. Rather in Wittgensteins words, they
are "bad pupils".
Before turning from the examination of the Wittgensteinian
problematic to the remainder of our argument, a qualification
should be made. Despite his pervasive influence, Wittgenstein alone
is not to blame for this problematic, nor is it peculiar to
professional philosophy carried out by his students. Although
Wittgenstein's style is distinctive, one finds the underlying problematic, and the resulting fragmentation, in many places. Its prevalence
amongst members of Arts and Humanities Faculties throughout the
world confirms the continuing persistence of "Two Cultures". The
idea is also held by many scientists. To many persons it seems
commonsensical. One also finds it in the work of people who have

" See The Retreal to Commitment, 2nd edition, op. cit., p. 100 & n., as well as chapter 15
below.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

THE UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS OF POPPER'S OPPONENTS

never read Wittgenstein. And one finds similar doctrines especially
in the sociology of knowledge;39 in Habermas and in the writings of
the Frankfurt school; in Heidegger and hermeneutics;34 in the work
of Michel Foucault and the "archaeologists of knowledge"; and in
the sort of American neo-pragmatism once represented by Morton
White and now by Richard Rorty.

canon or set of criteria for each form of knowledge or way of
life-does not arise; and there is no reason any longer for the assumption of underlying and irreducible disunity.
What then lies at the heart of the dispute between the two sides?
It is the question whether Popper has indeed given a sound deductive solution to the problem of induction. If he has, there is no
difficulty in formulating a universally valid account of the growth of
knowledge. If he has not, the argument that we have reviewed-what I call the "Wittgensteinian problematic"-may continue
to exert some force.
This is the context of the dispute. No one who neglects it, or
fails to consider what rides on the rival claims that the problem of
induction has or has not been solved, is likely to reach understanding or agreement on any subordinate issue.

7. A Different Look at the Matter
Popperians see the problematic, and the whole matter of the
unity and division of knowledge, utterly differently.95
The whole chain of argumentation just rehearsed depends on the
first steps: the claims that sense experience is the foundation and
justification of all knowledge, that induction exists, and that the
problem of induction cannot be solved nor scientific method charted
in a purely deductive way. But Popper argues that these claims are
all invalid. If he is right, the whole argument unravels, and a whole
generation of philosophising is undone.
Popper gave a solution to the problem of induction, showing that
there is a falsifying deductive relationship between evidence and
theory (see chapters 10 and 11 above). Thus there is no need to
chart a separate inductive logic for science. Quite the contrary, there
is no such thing as induction. If logic can maintain its sway in the
natural (or "inductive") sciences, if it 'is not necessary to chart a
special canon, an "inductive logic" for the natural sciences, then the
rest of the argument-the extended strategy for permitting a special

" See Peter Munz, "Philosophy and the Mirror of Rorty", and my "AJienation Alienated: The
Economics of Knowledge versus the Psychology and Sociology of Knowledge" both in Radnitzky
and P.artley, Evolutionary Epistemology, Rationality, and the Soctology of Knowledge, op. cit.
" See Hans Albert, "Hermeneutics and Economics: A Criticism of Hermeneutical Thinking in
the Social Sciences", Kuhios, vol. 41, 1988, fasc. 4, pp. 573-602.
My statement here challenges those who say that Popper and Wittgenstein-whatever their
differences may be-are in agreensent with regard to "non-foundationalism" or "nonjustificationism". Thus J, J. Ross writes of "an approach in epistemology held in common by Karl Popper
and the later Wittgenstein . . . which has now come to be called 'non-foundationalism". ('The
Tradition of Rational Criticism: Wittgenstein and Popper", in Witigenstein, the Vienna Circle, and
Critical Rationalism: Proceedings of the 3rd International Wittgenstein Symposium (Vienna: Hdlder-PichlerTempsky, 1979), pp. 415-419.) Ross and others who have argued in this way are wholly
mistaken-as I hope will be evident from the argument and evidence of the present chapter, as
well as from my "Non-Justificationism: Popper versus Wittgenstein", in Eprstemology and Philosophy of
Science: Proceedings of the 7th International Witigenstein Sympostum (Vienna: Holder-Pichler-Tempsky,
1983), Pp. 255-261). See also Alvin I. Goldman, 'What Is Justified Belief?", in George S. Pappas,
ed., Justification and Knowledge, op. cit., p. 14.
226

227

Chapter 15
JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY
1 Comprehensive Rationality
As claimed at the opening of the previous chapter, two independent yet closely related features of the Wittgensteinian position force
the conclusion that knowledge is essentially fragmented and create a
gulf between Popper's approach and that of the philosophical
profession. We have reviewed the first, contextual, feature-"the
Wittgensteinian problematic". The second-to which I now turn-is
structural, and comes from "justificationism") Since justificationism is
already deeply woven into the Wittgensteinian problematic, some of
the motifs already discussed will surface again.
If the Wittgensteinian problematic generated the doctrine of the
division or fragmentation of knowledge, it is justificationism that
leads to the doctrine of the limits of rationality. The two positions
work closely together, and reinforce one another. For once one has
conceded that rationality is limited in its critical range, it becomes
more plausible that there exist disciplines or fields (or forms of
knowledge or ways of life) wherein the standards of logic and science, the chief instruments of rationality, should be forbidden to
range. Yet justificationism is more important in explaining Popper's
differences with other philosophers than is the Wittgensteinian problematic. Although its influence has spread, the Wittgensteinian
problematic occurs first, and chiefly, amongst followers of Wittgenstein. Justificationism, however, is to be found everywhere.
What is justificationism?
Justificationism is a characteristic of most philosophical theories of
rationality. Rationality is of course opinion and action in accordance
with reason. But what this amounts to is disputed by philosophers,
and the theory of rationality grows from such disagreement.
While there are numerous ways to draw an inventory of theories
of rationality, all important variants fall into one of three main
categories: comprehensive rationality (the traditional account, of which
logical positivism is an example), limited rationality (the most common
Wittgensteinian account of rationality, and the account accepted by
most contemporary philosophical professionals), and pancritical

See The Retreat to Commitment, 2nd edition, op. cit.; and also K. R. Popper, Realom and the
Aim of Science, op. cit., Part 1, section 2.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

rationality (the generalisation and interpretation that I have imposed
on Popper's views).
The first two share the assumption that rational opinion and
action must be justified or given a foundation. Different writers
characterise the process of justification in slightly different ways. For
example, a theory of rationality may be concerned with how to
verify, confirm, make firmer, strengthen, validate, make certain,
show to be certain, make acceptable, render more probable, defend
whatever opinion or action is under consideration.
Comprehensive rationality dominates traditional philosophical approaches and remains even today perhaps the most common understanding of rationality.2 It is stated as early as Epictetus (Discourses,
Chapter 2), and requires that a rationalist accepts all and only those
positions that can be justified by appeal to a rational authority.
What is the nature of this rational authority? Here again defenders of comprehensive rationality differ, their answers falling into two
main categories. The first is Intellectualism (or Rationalism), according to which rational authority lies in the Intellect or Reason. A
Rationalist justifies his opinion and action by appealing to intellectual intuition or the faculty of reason. This position is associated
with the philosophies of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz.
The second is Empiricism (or sensationalism or positivism),
according to which the rational authority lies in sense experience.
An empiricist justifies his or her actions and opinions by appealing
to sense observation. Associated with thi view are the philosophies
of Locke, Hume, Mach, and the Carnap of Der logische AuJbau der
Welt.2
There are a number of reasons why comprehensive accounts of
rationality-or comprehensive justificationisms or foundationalisms-are today widely thought to have failed. I shall cite only four.
First, the two main candidates for authority-pure reason and
sense observation-are hardly reliable. Sense observations are psy
chologically and physiologically impure: they are theory-impregnated, and subject to error and illusion (see chapters 10 and 11
above).4

2 See W. P. Alston and Richard B. Brandt, The Problems of Philosophy (Boston; Allyn and
Bacon, Inc., 1978), p. 605; George S. Pappas and Marshall Swain, eds., Essays on Knowledge and
JustiJicadon (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1978).
Rudolf Carnap, The Logical Structure of the World, op. cit., p. xvii.
l This consideration plays a prominent role in the theories of Popper and Hayek.

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

Second, even if reason and sense observation were infallible, both
authorities are intrinsically inadequate to do what is required, for
they are either too narrow or too wide (or both at once). Clear and
distinct ideas of reason let in too much (are too wide) in the sense
that they can justify contradictory conclusions-as Kant showed with
the antinomies of pure reason. Sense observation, on the other
hand, is logically inadequate to justify scientific laws, causality, the
accuracy of memory, or the existence of other people and the
external world; and in this sense it excludes too much and is too
narrow.
Third, the two requirements for comprehensive rationality-that
all and only those positions be accepted that can be justified by
appeal to the rational authority-are mutually incompatible. If we
accept the second requirement we must justify the first, But the first
requirement is not justifiable by sense observation, intellectual
intuition, or any other rational authority ever proposed. Moreover,
any such justification of the practice of accepting the results of
argument, even if it could per impossibile be carried out, would be
pointless unless it were already accepted that a justification should
be accepted at least here. And this may well be at issue. In sum, if
the first requirement cannot be justified, either theoretically or
practically, the second requirement forbids that one hold it. Worse,
the second requirement also cannot be justified by appeal to rational
criteria or authorities. Therefore it asserts its own untenability and
must, if correct, be rejected.
Fourth, and most serious, no version of comprehensive rationality
can defeat the ancient argument about the limits of rationality,
which is found as early as Sextus Empiricus and the ancient sceptics,
to the effect that there are essential limitations to justification.° Any
view may be challenged by questions such as "How do you know?",
"Give me a reason", or "Prove it." When such challenges are accepted by citing further reasons that justify those views under
challenge, these views may be questioned in turn. And so on forever. Yet if the burden of justification is perpetually shifted to a
higher-order reason or authority, the contention originally questioned is never effectively defended. One may as well never have
begun the defence: an infinite regress is created. To justify the

Sextus Empiricus, Works in four volumes, Loch Classical Library, Harvard University Press.
See also Richard H. Popkin, The History of Scepticism from Eraomtem to Spinosa, op. cit., and The High
Road to Pyrrhanism, op. cit.
001

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

original conclusion, one must eventually stop at something not open
to question Jbr which one does not and need not provide justtficatory
reasons. Such a thing-whether it be called a standard, criterion,
authority, basic presupposition, framework, way of life-would mark
the halting point for rational discussion, the limit of rationality.
To sum up these four insuperable difficulties in comprehensive
rationality: the first two argue that all proposed authorities are, for
various reasons, inadequate to their task; the third argues that the
position is inconsistent; the fourth, that it demands unlimited
justification whereas justification is essentially limited.

2. Limited Rationality
There have been two chief responses to the collapse of comprehensive rationality. There is no essential difference between the two,
only differences of emphasis. Both reactions fall under what I call
theories of limited rationality. The first is openly irrationalist, or fideist.
With joy, fideists take any difficulties in comprehensive rationalism
to mark the breakdown of over-reaching reason. The fideist makes a
claim. It is less than an argument, and indeed the radical fideist is
concerned with argument only to the extent that it is an effective
weapon against someone, such as a rationalist, who is moved by
argument. This claim is simple. Since an eventual halt to rational
justification is inevitable, justification must be brought about without
reason, subjectively and particularly. Thus the fideist deliberately
makes a final, unquestionable, subjective commitment to some particular principles or authority or tradition or way of life, to some
framework or set of presuppositions. Such a way of life creates and
defines itself by reference to the limits of justification accepted
within it: by reference to that to which commitment is made or
imposed, in regard to which argument is brought to a close.
Although this limit to justification is a limitation to rationality,
and although reason is now relativised to it, it remains a logical
limitation. This point is emphasised in order to press home the
attack on rationality. For if no one can escape subjective commitment, then no one may be criticised rationally for having made such
a commitment-no matter how idiosyncratic it might be. If one
must, then one may: any irrationalist thus has a rational excuse for
subjective irrationalism. He has a tu quo que or boomerang argument.
To any critic the irrationalist can reply: tu quo que, reminding him
232

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

that those whose rationality is similarly limited should not berate
anyone for admitting to the limitation. The limitation is the more
telling because it appears that in those things which matter
most-one's ultimate standards and principles-reason is incompetent, and that those matters which reason can decide are of
comparatively little importance. Kierkegaard, in his Fear and Trembling, in his Johannes Climacus, or De Omnibus Dubitandum Est, is one
of many writers who have used such an argument to reach such a
conclusion.
The second main reaction to the difficulties of comprehensive
rationality does not differ structurally from the one just described;
and it reaches most of the same conclusions. Yet there is a marked
difference of emphasis and mood. It too is often called "fideism",°
and yet if it is so, it is a fideism "without glee". It is taken up by
some, such as Wittgenstein, who, although deeply ambivalent in
their attitudes towards reason, nonetheless indicate their respect for
argument by taking the arguments against comprehensive rationality
seriously and by attempting to chart a more adequate, limited
approach to questions of rationality.
Such a limited view of rationality is common within British
philosophy of the so-called analytical sort, and also within American
neo-pragmatism. Taking such a general approach, but differing
greatly in individual emphasis and attitudes, are Sir Alfred Ayer,
Robert Nozick, Hilary Putnam, W. V. Quine, Richard Rorty, Morton
White, and many others. It is now difficult to find a philosopher
who does not take some such approach, however reluctantly.7
Despite differences, virtually all who take this limited approach to
rationality share at least two assumptions to which we shall now
turn in more detail. One concerns commitment and the limits of
justification. The other treats description as the only alternative to
justification. In both respects the Wittgensteinian problematic is
reinforced.
First, these philosophers accept that grounds, reasons, or justifications must be given for rational claims, but insist that the standards-or principles, criteria, authorities, presuppositions, frameworks,

See Kai Nielsen, Scepticism (London: Macmillan, 1973), P. 102.
A. J. Ayer, The Problem of Knowledge, op. cit.; Robert Nozick, Philosophical Explanations
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981); Hilary Putnam, 'The 'Corroboration' of Theories",
in Schilpp, op. cit.; W. V. Quine, From a Logical Point of View (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1953); Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, op. cit.; and Morton white, Toward
Reunion in Philosophy, op. cit.
233

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

ways of life-to which appeal is made in such justification cannot
and need not be themselves justified, and that a non-rational commitment to them must hence be made.
A few examples may be given. The Wittgensteinian philosopher
of education, Professor Paul Hirst of Cambridge University, has
developed an account of rationality conforming to this first assumption. For him any rational activity, "as such", is characterised by
commitment to fundamental principles of justification which mark
the limits of rationality.8 These principles are ultimate in that they
themselves cannot be justified and hence cannot be assessed or
questioned. Rather, justification, and hence assessment, can be made
only by means of them. Hirst explains that such principles do not
need to be justified, since their justification "is written into them".
In On Certainty, Wittgenstein himself states such a position:
. somewhere I must begin
Must I not begin to trust somewhere?
with not-doubting; and that is not, so to speak, hasty but excusable:
it is part of judging. (150) . . . regarding (something) as absolutely
. Doubt
solid is part of our method of doubt and enquiry. (151)
itself rests only on what is beyond doubt. (519) . . . The questions
that we raise and our doubts depend on the fact that some propositions are exempt from doubt, are as it were like hinges on which
those turn. . . . If I want the door to turn the hinges must stay
put. (341) . . . Whenever we test any thing we are already presupposing something that is not tested. (163) . . At the foundation of
well-founded belief lies belief that is not founded. (253) . . Giving
grounds . . . justifying the evidence, comes to an end- but the
end is not certain propositions' striking us immediately as true, i.e.,
it is not a kind of seeing on our part; it is our acting, which lies at
the bottom of the language-game. (204) . . . The language-game is
not based on grounds. It is not reasonable (or unreasonable).
(559) . . if the pupil cast doubt on the justification of inductive
arguments. . . the teacher would feel that this was only holding
them up, that this way the pupil would only get stuck and make

Hirst gives difkrent accounts of the alleged principles of rationality in different places. A
"third" principle that turns up is that to be rational one must start with clear and specific
objectives. No one would deny the general desirability of clear and specific objectives: and if one
does specif' one's objectives as best one can, one may get a somewhat clearer idea of what is
happening in one's life as one meets or fails to meet them. nut it is "scientism" to identif'
rationality with any such goal. Any such approach is thoroughly undermined by Hayek's
argument concerning complex orders, and the discovery that in objective knowledge it is
impossible for one ever to know what one is talking about. See Part I above; K. R. Popper,
Unended Quest, op. cit., sec. 7; and E A. Hayek, The Fatal Conceit, op. cit., chapters 4 and 5.

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

no progress.-And he would be right. . . this pupil has not learned
to ask questions. He has not learned the game that we are trying
to teach him. (315)
Wittgenstein's statements are clear and, confirming our interpretation of them, his student Norman Malcolm has explained in his
essay on "The Groundlessness of Belief" that Wittgenstein means
that justification occurs within a system, and that there can be no
rational justification of the framework itself. Rather, as Malcolm puts
it: "The framework propositions of the system are not put to the
test." It is, he maintains, a conceptual requirement that inquiries stay
within boundaries.9 The implications of this claim for the "unity" of
the sciences are obvious, as are their relation to the Wittgensteinian
problematic.
Scientific and religious frameworks are simply alleged to be on a
par. In line with Wittgenstein's own remarks about the justification
of induction, Malcolm statestO:
the attitude toward induction is belief in the sense of "religious"
belief-that is to say, an acceptance which is not conjecture or
surmise and for which there is no reason-it is a groundless
acceptance . . . . Religion is a form of life . . . . Science is another.
Neither stands in need of justification, the one no more than the
other.

Yet there is a difference between Wittgenstein and the gleeful fideist
who glories in the limitations of reason and calls for deliberate
commitment to the absurdity of one's choice. Malcolm reports that,
on the Wittgensteinian view, one does not decide to accept framework propositions. Rather, "we are taught, or we absorb, the systems within which we raise doubts. . . . We grow into a framework.
We don't question it. We accept it trustingly. But this acceptance is
not a consequence of reflection." No doubt: but while one often
accepts positions without reflection, and indeed could hardly live
without doing so, experience may lead to reflection, which may in
turn lead one to modify or reject what one has absorbed.

Norman Malcolm, "The Groundlessness of Belief', in Stuart C. Brown, ed., Reason and
Religion (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977), pp. 143-157.
'°

Ibid.

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

Before stating the position briefly, I would like to note and
concede-lest we be sidetracked in textual exegesis-that there are,
in Popper's early works (e.g., in his first book, Die beiden Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie, in The Logic of Scientific Discovery, and also
in the first three editions of The Open Society and Its Enemies) a few
fideistic remarks and passages. In The Open Society and Its Enemies
(chapter 24) this fideism appears in Popper's "irrational faith in
reason", as he calls it, when he urges us to "bind" ourselves to
reason. In The Logic of Scientific Discovery (chapter 5), a similar
fideistic "decisionism" emerges briefly in his discussion of the acceptance of basic statements, and in Die beiden Grundprobleme such a
fideism appears in his remarks about the selection of aims and
goals, and about "Kant's idea of the primacy of practical reason".t3
These early fideistic rmarks are relatively unimportant; they play
no significant role in Popper's early thought and none at all in his
later thought, but are superfluous remnants of justificationism, out
of line with the main thrust and intent of his methodology, empty
baggage carried over from the dominant tradition. When, in 1960, I
proposed to contrast justificationist and nonjustificationist theories of
criticism as a generalisation of his distinction between verification
and falsification, Popper dropped this remaining fideism, and
adopted instead the approach that I am about to describe, thereby
considerably improving his position in consistency, clarity, and
generality. Our contrast between justificationist and nonjustificationist
accounts was introduced at that time.td
The alternative approach, which Popper continues to call "critical
rationalism" and which I prefer to call "comprehensively critical" or
"pancritical" rationality, is then an attempt to overcome the problem
of the limits of rationality by generalising and correcting Popper's
early approach.

So much for these assumptions made by proponents of "limited
rationality". Another assumption-which we have already seen at
work within the Wittgensteinian problematic-is that the task of the
philosopher, since it has been shown that any attempt to justify
standards (or frameworks or ways of life) must be in vain, is to
describe these. The task of the philosopher is the subject-neutral
description of all standards and frameworks-a description in terms
of which no particular set of them is given authority or precedence
or superiority over any other. We have examined above the research program that is part of this second assumption.
Most contemporary philosophers assume that there are no options
other than the several sorts of comprehensive rationality and several
sorts of limited rationality just reviewed, and indeed consider no
other possibilities. On this point, those who are developing Popper's
position disagree utterly. I should like to indicate our own solution-pancritical rationality-in the next section. The solution to the
problem of induction, the consequent dissolution of the Wittgensteinian problematic, and the nonjustificational account of criticism
that I am about to present, work together to enable us to avoid the
related Wittgensteinian doctrines of the division of knowledge and
the limits of rationality.

3. Pancritical Rationality
Our position differs from the theories of rationality just rehearsed
in that it provides a nonjustificational account of rationality. In this
account, rationality is unlimited with regard to criticism (although
there are various other limitations to rationality1 which Popper, like
Hayek, stresses, in opposition to various forms of "scientism").
Moreover, there are no intrinsic logical features that require the
division or fragmentation of knowledge.t3

justification: they are simply given to us and must be accepted by us". A more accurate account of
Hayek's views on such matters is given by Walter Weimer in his "Hayek's Approach to Complex
Phenomena: An Introduction to the Theoretical Psychology of The Sensoly Order", in Walter B.
Weimer and David S. Palermo, eds., Cognition and the Symbolic Process, vol. 2 (Hillsdale: Lawrence
Erlbaum, 1982), pp. 24 1-285, especially pp. 283-284. Weimer quotes Hayek's New Studies, op. cit.,

See my list in The Retreat to Commitment second edition, op. cit., "Introduction 1984". See
also Hayek's discussion in The Sen.coiy Order, op. cit., of limits of prediction and explanation of
complex phenomena, and his review of limits of rationality in The Fatal Conceit, op. cit., chapters 4
and 5,
See F A. Hayek, The Counter-Revolution of Science: Studies on the Abuse of Reason, op. cit., and
The Fatal Conceit, op. cit., as well as his other writings, some of which are cited in Part I above.
Hayek is sometimes misunderstood on this point. Thus I disagree with John Gray's study in The
Literature of Liberty, 1983, where he states (p. 32) that Hayek believes that in social theory "We
come to a stop with the basic constitutive traditions of social life", which "like Wittgenstein's forms
of life, cannot be the objects of further criticisms, since they are at the terminus of criticism and

9R

p. 298: "the liberal must claim the right critically to examine every single value or moral rule of
his society".
' Die beiden Grund/irobleme der Erkenntnistheorie, op. cit., p. 394.
" See my discussion in The Retreat to Commitment, 2nd edition, op. cit., and also Popper's
discussion in Realism and the Aim of Science, op. cit., part 1, section 2.

Ii

237

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

We begin by denying both assumptions of limited rationality
mentioned above: that is, we deny that justifications must be given
in order for actions or beliefs to be rational. And we do not turn to
description when justification proves impossible. Rather, all justijicalion whatever is abandoned. Criticism, not description, becomes the alternative
to justification.
While Wittgenstein is right to claim that principles and standards
of rationality (oi; again, frameworks and ways of life) cannot be
justified rationally, this is a triviality rather than an indication of the
limits of rationality. Nothing at all can be justified rationally. There
is no such thing as "well-founded belief' anywhere in a "system".
Not only do we not attempt to justify the standards; we do not attempt to
justify anything else in terms of the standards.
Rather, rationality is located in criticism. (Hence the name "pancritical rationality"-or comprehensively critical rationalism, as I
initially called it.) A rationalist becomes one who holds everything-including standards, goals, criteria, authorities, decisions, and especially
any framework or way of life-open to criticism. He or she withholds nothing from examination and review. The rationalist, by
contrast to Malcolm, does wish to put the framework of his system
to the test. The framework is held rationally only to the extent that
it is subjected to and survives criticism. Thus the rationalist wishes
to enhance the role of "reflective acceptance" of frameworks, not to
forbid it. In connexion with the examination of frameworks, some
rationalists, such as Popper, have gone so far as to challenge the
existence of inductive reasoning, and neither believe in induction
nor regard it as immune from criticism. Anyone who reads the
selections from Wittgenstein quoted earlier will see that Popperian
rationalists definitely are, from his point of view, "bad pupils".
Some may object to our position that it is simply impossible-not
only practically impossible, but also logically so. They will insist that all
criticism is in terms of something which must be taken for granted as justified, and which is hence beyond criticism. They may add that it is a
mark of our being bad pupils that we do not understand this.
But we do understand it: we understand what the claim means
and know that Wittgensteinians (and many others) make it all the
time. We also understand something of the historical background of
the claim. This claim is itself a "framework" or structural feature.
But we deny it. We deny that it is correct: we deny that it is logically
necessary to trust something-that there need be a "hinge"-that is
beyond doubt. The idea of the hinge is one of many bad metaphors

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

with which Wittgenstein seems to have mesmerised some philosophers. Hinges come loose, as any architect should know. "Regarding
something as absolutely solid" is not part of our method of doubt
and enquiry. Nor do we suppose that something that is not tested
must be presupposed whenever a test is made.
The distinctive character of our position lies in its separation of
the question of justification from the question of criticism. Of course
all criticism is "in terms of' something. But this "something" in
terms of which criticising is done need be neither justified, nor
taken for granted, nor beyond criticism. One example of such
nonjustificational criticism is Popper's account of corroborability. To
test a particular theory, the sorts of events incompatible with it may
be determined, and then experimental arrangements may be set up
to attempt to produce such events. Suppose that the test goes
against the theory. What has happened? The theory has been
criticised in terms of the test: the theory is now problematical in
that it is false relative to the test reports. The test reports may at
the moment be unproblematical. In that event, the theory may be
provisionally and conjecturally rejected because it conflicts with
something that is unproblematical (or less problematical). Does this
establish or justif' the rejection of the theory? Not at all. Test
reports are hypothetical, criticisable, and revisable-forever-just like
everything else. They may be reconsidered, and they may become
problematical: they are themselves, open to criticism through tests of
their own consequences.
This process of testing and attempted falsification is of course
potentially infinite: one can criticise criticisms indefinitely. Rationality
is in this sense unlimited. But no infinite regress arises since there is
no question of proof or justification of anything at all. This approach may produce in one unused to it an uncomfortable feeling
of floating, of having no firm foundation. That would be appropriate: for it is floating; it is doing without a foundation. But this
approach does not produce paradox, nor is floating logically impossible,
however physically difficult it may be in some environments. Thus
the tu quo que argument is defeated: no commitment is necessary, all
commitments may be criticised.
In sum, we separate justification and criticism; whereas in Wittgensteinianism justification and criticism remain fused. The unconscious fusion of justification and criticism that permeates Wittgenstein's thought explains why Wittgensteinians do not have the option of

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

using criticism as an alternative to justification, and turn to description
of frameworks and standards when justification turns out to be
impossible. Criticism only appears as an alternative to justification
after the two notions are separated.

areas devoted to the advancement of knowledge, whether or not
they be called scientific.'7
What is this underlying common method?
John Dewey was right to say, in his essay "On the Influence of
Darwin on Philosophy", that evolutionary thought had introduced a
mode of thinking that should transform the logic of knowledge.
Human knowledge grows by the method of variation and selection
found in living organisms. Furthermore, evolutionary adaptation in
organisms is also a knowledge process, a process in which information about the environment is incorporated into the organism.
Human knowledge-like other processes for acquiring knowledge-increases by conjecture (blind variation or untested new
theories) and refutation (selective retention). This process resembles
evolution, with variations of organic forms sometimes surviving,
sometimes disappearing.
Why then have twentieth-centur7y philosophers, who have known
and often advocated evolutionary theory, not adopted a similar approach? Not for want of trying. The problem is that it is impossible,
within a justificationist approach, consistently to work out a truly
evolutionary epistemology. Whereas there is a clear counterpart in
biology to nonjustificational criticism, there is no counterpart to the
"justification" that plays so important a role in Wittgensteinian and
most professional philosophical thought. Indeed the concern for
justification is non-Darwinian, even pre-Darwinian and Lamarckian
in character.'8 The question of the justification of opinion is as
irrelevant as a question about whether a particular mutation is
justified (or foresighted, or suitable in advance of natural selection,
in the Lamarckian sense). The issue, rather, is of the viability of the
mutation-or the proposed opinion. That question is resolved
through exposing the opinion to pressures, such as those of natural
selection-or attempted criticism and refutation. Mere survival for a
time is not enough to show either adaptation or truth: a species
that survives for thousands of years may eventually become extinct
just as a theory that survived for many generations may eventually
be refuted-as was Newton's. A framework for thought-such as the
inductivist framework, or the justificationist framework-may even-

4. The Ecology of Rationality and the Unity of Knowledge
The new problem of rationality-of criticism and the growth of
knowledge-now becomes the problem of the ecology of rationality.'5
Instead of positing authorities to guarantee and criticise actions and
opinions, the aim becomes to construct a philosophical program to
foster the growth of knowledge and to counteract intellectual error.
Within such a program, the traditional "How do you know?" question does not arise. For we do not know. A different question
becomes paramount: "How can our lives and institutions be arranged so as to expose our positions, actions, beliefs, aims, conjectures, decisions, standards, frameworks, ways of life, policies, traditional practices, and such like, to optimum examination, in order to
counteract and eliminate as much error as possible?"°
Thus a general program is demanded. The questions raised by
this approach have implications leading to the need for a vast program to develop critical institutions and methods which will contribute to the creation of such an environment.
An ecological approach leads back to the question of the unity of
the sciences (as well as to the questions about educational institutions with which this book began). There is a unity within all
knowledge, the sciences included, through a unity of method. This
unity is not one of reduction: chemistry and physics, say, cannot be
reduced to one another, let alone to observation, but they employ
the same methods. The same applies to other domains of knowledge: thus more is claimed than the mere unity of the sciences. So
far as underlying methodology is concerned, there is a unity to all

See Radnitzky and hartley, Evolutionasy Eptitevwlogy, Rationality, and the Sociology of Knowledge, op. cit., chapters 1 and 18.
These questions are not merely rhetorical. Detailed partial answers to them are provided
by the "public choice" school of economics. Buchanan and Tullock are primarily concerned with
the reform of political institutions. An approach parallel to theirs needs to be developed for the
reform of educational institutions. See Part I above.

' Within this basic unity, many important subdivisions or speciations of knowledge may of
course exist-as in Hayek's distinction between simple and complex phenomena. On tlsese
questions see my paper, 'The Division of Knowledge", op. cit., and my discussion of Hirst in the
next section.
" See Radnitaky and Bartiey, EoolnIioniy Epi.stemology, op. cit., p. 25.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

tually be refuted too.'° All disciplines and forms of life can be seen
as evolutionary products which, as far as their intellectual viability is
concerned, are to be subjected to critical examination-an examination which includes the critical review of their fundamental principles. There are no longer any principles-or frameworks-that are
fundamental in the sense of being beyond criticism. There is no
method peculiar to philosophy or to science or to logic (see the
epigraph to chapter 9). The same general critical method, itself
subject to modification, is universal. Moreover, it is only now that
the question can arise as to what extent the methods of the sciences
are applicable to other areas.
* * * *

In this chapter and the last I have argued that the Wittgensteinian problematic lies at the heart of the differences between
those who approach matters in a Popperian spirit and most of those
who are professional philosophers. I have argued that Wittgenstein,
like most professional philosophers and the entire philosophical
tradition, is thoroughly justificationist in his approach, abandoning
justification only vis a vis frameworks rather than systematically; and
that where he does abandon or retain justification, he does so for
thoroughly justificationist reasons.
The approach taken by professional philosophy is then so much
at odds with our approach that when one compares and contrasts
them one risks failing to get anywhere at all: failing to reach any
understanding of the underlying disagreements let alone any resolution thereof. In such a situation, it is relatively ineffectual to dispute
details. In such situations, a little preparatory work, a little context,
helps.
Thus the presentation that I have given-contextualising the
doctrine of the fragmentation of knowledge and revealing its structure-may prove more effective than haggling about details that
arise only within that structure. I have aimed to pull the rug from
under such philosophy.

' The claim that there is a parallel between, on the one hand, natural selection in organic
evolution, and, on the other hand, trial and error learning, involves no naturalistic fallacy. The
claim is not that the growth of knowledge ought to follow an evolutionary pattern, but that
processes that lead to increased fit-or correspondence--do happen to be parallel in many
respects. Whether anyone should aim for such "fit" is another question.

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

5. Some Specific Criticisms and Some Minute Philosophy:
Incantation and a priori Claims
Fool: The reason why the seven stars are no more than
seven is a pretty reason,

Lear: Because they are not eight?
Fool: Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.
King Lear, V, i, 39-41.

In this section, however, now that the context of the dispute is in
place, I shall make a few more detailed objections to the positions
that arise from justificationism and the Wittgensteinian problematic.
First, these positions are usually a priori. This point ought to be
driven home to illustrate the bogus character of the claim that
Wittgensteinian and professional philosophy is "analytical" and
depends on careful study of individual concrete cases. Take as an
example the influential Wittgensteinian philosopher, Paul Hirst,
whom I have already mentioned, Professor of Philosophy of Education at the University of Cambridge. Hirst's work-which is an
application of the Wittgensteinian research program to education-is
in'iuential not only amongst philosophers; he also appears to have
succeeded in introducing his account of the essential division of
knowledge into the basic school curriculum in England and Wales.
Professor Malcolm Skilbeck, Director of Studies at the British Council, testifies: "an academic theory of liberal education underlies Her
Majesty's Inspectorate's view of the curriculum. I am referring to
Paul first's analysis of forms and fields of knowledge."°° Writing of
Hirst's account of "the forms of knowledge" and of their bearing on
education, Richard Peters (for many years Professor of Philosophy at
the Institute of Education of the University of London) states that
"anyone working in the field has to take up some stand with regard
to them".2'
I stand opposed. Not that the problem originates with first: I
want to expose the Wittgensteinian assumptions from which his

'° See Skilbeck's Inaugural Lecture at the London Institute of Education, A Core Curriculum
for Ihe Common School (London: University of London Institute of Education, 1982), esp. p. 19. See
also Her Majesty's Inspectorate, A View of the Curriculum (London: HMSO, 1980).
" R. S. Peters, "General Editor's Note" to P. H. Hirst, Knowledge and the Curriculum op. cit.,
p. viii.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

approach derives, and to illustrate the reach they now have into the
very heart of our cultural life.22
Hirst claims that all knowledge is divided into "seven or eight"
essentially different, "primary", "necessary", "final", "unique", and
"irreducible" categories or forms, each of which has a "distinctive
logical structure" stemming from the "logic", "truth criteria", "criteria of validity", "criteria of meaning", "manner of justification", and
"central concepts" that are peculiar to it and distinguish it from all
the others. These categories are described alternately as "forms of
knowledge" and "forms of understanding" and are explicitly linked
with, and sometimes identified with, Wittgenstein's language games.
These essentially separate, "logically delimited" domains seem to
be mathematics, the physical sciences, knowledge of persons, literature and the fine arts, morals, religion, and philosophy. I write
"seem" because Hirst makes differing listings in different places: for
instance, he once seemed to want to classify "historical knowledge"
as a separate form, but later thought it best "not to refer to history
or the social sciences in any statement of the forms of knowledge as
such". He also sometimes writes as if there is a more general
underlying distinction between the "human sciences" and the "physical sciences". And he has vacillated over the question whether
religion constitutes a separate form of knowledge.
About one thing, however, he is unwavering: whatever the forms
may be, they are essentially different, "primary", "necessary", "final",
"unique", and "irreducible". That is, his theory, like much professional philosophy, despite its pretence to analyse the concrete, is a
priori. Hirst got his ideas from reading Wittgenstein, not from any
investigation of the different areas of knowledge about which he
purports to write. He did not for instance get it from investigation
of, or reflection on, the current state of the sciences.
One sees this a priori quality from a brief look at one of his
"separate and irreducible forms"-mathematics. The most casual
look at mathematics shows that one could, on Hirst's own terms,
push the number of "forms of knowledge" very much higher than

22 In any case Hirst does not claim originality for his position, and acknowledges as precursors, in addition to Wittgenstein, Michael Oakeshott's Experience and ILs Modes, John MacMurrrays
Interpreting the Universe, K. G. Collingwood's Speculum Menti.s (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1956), and Louis Arnaud Reid's Ways of Knowledge and Experience. A position similar to Hirst's in
some ways, and similarly inspired, was published by Stephen Toulmin in The Uses of ,lrgunienl
(Cambridge: cambridge University Press, 1958) and Huswn Understsnding (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1972).

JUSTIFIGATION AND RATIONALITY

seven or eight. For instance, few practising mathematicians would be
prepared to specify the central concepts or principles of mathematics.
Just restricting ourselves to geometry, consider the following familiar
table of the various geometries:23
(4) Metrical (Euclidean) geometry
(3) Afline geometry
(2) Projective geometry
(1) Topology.
The relation between the higher and lower geometries is complicated, but it is not one of reducibility, as it would have to be were
there a set of principles of mathematics. Metrical geometry, for
instance, is only partiall' reducible to projective geometry; better,
metrical geometry is an enrichment of projective geometry. The
enrichment is partly of concepts, but mainly of theorems: there are
concepts essentially present on higher levels which are lacking on,
and unobtainable from, lower levels. But Hirst stipulates that each
form of knowledge possesses concepts peculiar to it. Then why not
say that there are four "forms of knowledge" within geometry
alone-not to mention the rest of mathematics? The same tactic
could be taken in other areas of mathematics and also in the natural sciences, wherein chemistry is not reducible to physics but is an
enrichment of it-and biology in turn an enrichment of chemistry.24
There are other ways to break down whatever initial plausibility
Hirst's division may have.23 Even factual and moral statements, for

See K. R. Popper and John C. Eccles, The Self and Its Brain, op. cit., pp. 20-21; and Peter
B. Medawar, "A Geometric Model of Reduction and Emergence", in F. Ayala and T Dobzhansky,
eds., Studies in 1/se Philosophy of Biology (London: Macmillan, 1974), pp. 67-73.
° I suppose that Hirst might try to evade part of this objection by claiming tisat the concepts
of natural science, however they may differ in character, are all empirical. But this would be
positivist nonsense, as can be seen from Popper's reductio demonstration of how, on positivist
terms, even 'God" can be rendered an "empirical concept". See K. K. Popper, Conjectures and
Refutations, op. cit., chapter 11, pp. 274-277. See also Popper's discussion in The Open Universe, op.
cit., Addenda 2 and 3, on reduction, esp. pp. 166-167.
° I wish simply to list, without comment or explanation, some of the more detailed points on
which I disagree with Hirst: a) he wrongly restricts knowledge to true statements, thus revealing
again that he holds to the epistemology of "justified true belief', and has failed to absorb (or even
to notice) the biological and epistemological arguments that objective knowledge includes false as
well as true statements; b) whereas he wants to distinguish forms of knowledge according to truth
criteria, there are no truth criteria of any interest; c) whereas his division of the forms of
knowledge proceeds according to criteria of meaning, meaning analysis is irrelevant to most
problems of philosophy-and the idea that such analysis is relevant is based on a false analogy
between the propositions of philosophy and the logical paradoxes; and d) his "principles" of
rationality, which he regards as beyond assessment, are incoherently stated and, so far as they can

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

instance, can be shown to be logically interrelated (without committing the "naturalistic fallacy") as I have argued elsewhere.26 Thus
Hirst's "forms" have little real basis, but result from an a priori
imposition of Wittgensteinian ideas on existing, crude, disciplinary
distinctions.
A priori character is not the only remarkable feature of such
positions. Another is mystification and ritual affirmations and denials.
This mystification takes several different but typical forms that use
let us call them "argumentations", for they are
rather similar . .
not arguments.
One such argumentation, mentioned briefly earlier, is that if one
is to pursue knowledge rationally, one must be committed to the
ultimate standards of rationality and justification. These, Hirst says,
cannot be justified and hence cannot be assessed or questioned, but they
also do not need to be justified, or are, in some higher sense,
justified after all. As Hirst puts it: the fact that they cannot be
justified does not mean that they are "without justification" for "they
have their justification written into them". In effect, he implies that
these standards act as judge in their own cause. "Nor", he insists,
"is any form of viciously circular justification involved by assuming
in the procedure what is being looked for. The situation is that we
have here reached the ultimate point where the question of justification ceases to be significantly applicable."
What Hirst contends is not an argument; it is simply a series of
claims, simply words. It seems as if many 'analytic philosophers go
into a kind of trance and repeat such phrases as a kind of magic
formula when they reach any question of the assessment of principles. Hirst does not show how his procedure avoids circularity or
infinite regress; he just denies that it does. He begs the question
and denies that he does so. He says that his principles are "self
authenticating", that they "have their justification written into them",
but he would condemn a similar move made by another. How does
he know that we have indeed here "reached the ultimate point
where the question of justification ceases to be significantly applicable"? If he does not know, if his claim is a conjecture, how might it
be tested? He might reply by saying that the "apparent" circularity
is due to "the inter-relation between the concepts of rational jus-

be understood, false.

See chapter 17 below; my Morality and Religion, op. cit., and my The Retreat to Commitment,
op. cit., Appendix 2.

94

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

tification and the pursuit of knowledge". But by arranging matters
so, i.e., by defining his concepts in terms of one another, he avoids
considering the possibility that knowledge might be pursued nonjustificationally yet rationally. Not to mention that he has "solved" his
problem by definition.
Another example of the same incanting is to be found in Sir
Alfred Ayer's The Problem of Knowledge, in which Ayer states explicitly
that his standards "act as judge in their own cause" (p. 75). He also
concedes that it is impossible to give a proof "that what we regard
as rational procedure really is so; that our conception of what
constitutes good evidence is right" (p. 74). Yet simply to discard the
demand that the standards of rationality be justified hardly suffices.
Ayer must proceed to show how his approach, as a theory of
rationality, can afford to dispense with the requirement that standards be justified. He does nothing of the sort. Why on his account
do our standards of rationality not need rational justification? His
answer is that any such standard
could be irrational only if there were a standard of rationality
which it failed to meet; whereas in fact it goes to set the standard:
arguments are judged to be rational or irrational by reference to it.
When it is understood that there logically could be no court of
superior jurisdiction, it hardly seems troubling that inductive
reasoning should be left, as it were, to act as judge in its own cause
(p. 75). . . . Since there can be no proof that what we take to be
good evidence really is so, . . . it is not sensible to demand one (p.
81).

When it is "understood" . . . Wittgenstein's word again. But
whether there could, logically, be any "court of superior jurisdiction" is the issue and cannot be conceded or "understood" in advance. Such a position, even if assumed to be coherent, must fail as
a theory of rationality. The nub of the fideist attack on comprehensive rationality, as we saw earlier, was not simply that it is impossible, but that since it is impossible, choice amongst competing ultimate positions is arbitrary. A theory of rationality that begins by
admitting the unjustiflability of standards of rationality must go on
to show that irrationalism can be escaped without comprehensive
rationality. In failing to do so, Ayer's discussion begs the question
and is itself a variety of fideism-and hence no answer to it (contrary to his intention).
247

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

Matters are even worse. Consider Ayer's argument more closely.
He contends that our standards of rationality enjoy an immunity
from the demand for justification since it would be impossible to
judge them to be irrational. Why? They set the standards on which any
such judgement of their own irrationality would have to be based. An
argument such as this could not be valid unless some particular
standards and procedures of rationality, such as Ayer's own (which,
like Wittgenstein's, include "scientific induction"), are assumed to be
correct. If some particular standards of rationality are correct, then
there can exist no other rational standards which are also correct
yet could nevertheless invalidate the former as irrational. This "if"
marks a crucial assumption: this is precisely what is at issue. Criticisms
of proposed standards of rationality have always questioned whether
they were correct. Alternative conceptions of scientific method, such
as Popper's, which deny the existence of inductive procedure, let
alone its legitimacy, do claim that there are standards of rationality
which positions such as Ayer's, Wittgenstein's and Hirst's fail to
meet.
Many other examples of such incantation, as opposed to argument, about circularity could be given,27 but the point has been
made.
I have been able to find in Hirst (and not in Ayer) one additional, only partly overlapping, argumentation on behalf of the necessity
of a sort of circularity or begging of the question. Hirst argues:

unless he is already moral, or persuade a man to be logical with
logical arguments unless he already accepts logic, and so on.29
Such arguments are clumsy and in themselves invalid applications
of the more general point that one cannot argue a man into a
position, including the position of listening to argument, unless he
has accepted that argument counts. That is, if both morality and
immorality are arguable positions, then one can argue a man into
either position only if he accepts that argument counts-i.e., if he is
prepared to accept the results of argument.
I briefly mentioned a version of this argument earlier, in my
discussion of the third objection to comprehensive rationality. The
argument, when put correctly, is valid. Nonetheless it seems to me
to be a rather weak argument, one to be avoided if possible. For it
remains verbal, and is more concerned with the source of a decision
to adopt a particular position than with the more important question whether that decision or position is open to examination. Thus
when one is concerned with the question as to whether a decision is
criticisable, it hardly matters whether that decision was originally
made as a result of logical discussion, or whether the individual in
question just stumbled into it, or whether he or she decided by
tossing yarrow stalks, or by some other arbitrary method.
In fact, even if the rationalist position had originally been adopted as a result of an irrational arbitrary decision, it is possible that
the person who made the choice would, by living in accordance
with critical traditions and precepts, gradually become very rational,
very open to criticism, as an unintended consequence of this original choice.3°
My own view is that important choices in life, such as philosophical viewpoints, ethical standards, even the decision to try to
argue logically, are often, indeed usually, not the result of argument
or logical reflection, any more than scientific theories are the result
of sense observation. Theories are put forward and choices are

To ask for the justification of any form of activity is significant only
if one is in fact committed already to seeking rational knowledge.
To ask for a justification of the pursuit of rational knowledge itself
therefore presupposes some form of commitment to what one is
seeking to justify.28
This is a misapplied and garbled rendering of a very old argument
that has an element of truth to it but is for the most part specious.
The old argument is that one cannot persuade a man to be moral

° See my discussion of Hilary Putnam in The Retreat to Commitment, op. cit. second edition,
pp. 102-105, and in chapter 10, section 8 above.
' Hirst, op. cit., p. 210.

For an example of this sort of reasoning see Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics, book I, section
iv, and book x, section ix; E H. Bradley, "Why Should I Be Moral?", in Ethical Studies, Essay II,
second edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1927); I-I. A. Prichard, "Does Moral Philosophy
Rest on a Mistake?", in Mind, N.S. vol 21, 1912, and in Moral Obligation (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1949). See my discussion of these arguments in my "Rationality, Criticism, and
Logic", op. cit., footnote 37.
'° In this connection see my discussion of unintended consequences in my "Em schwieriger
Mensch: Eine Portr'Atskizze von Sir Karl Popper", in Eckhard Nordhofen, ed., Philosophen des 20.
Jahrhundert.s in Portraits (Konigstein/Taunus: Athenäum verlag, 1980), as well as my "Alienation
Alienated", in Radnitzky and Bartley, eds., Evolutionary Epistemology, op. cit.

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

made. The question is whether or not they are open to criticism,
not whether they were made as a result of logical reasoning. If the
former, then they are held rationally, even if they were not originally made rationally, as, for instance, the result or conclusion of a
logical argument.
To return this argument to Hirst: he sees none of these nuances,
and he misses the point entirely. Remember, he maintains that to ask for
a justification of any activity is significant only if one is in fact
committed already to seeking rational knowledge. He also claims
that to question the pursuit of rational knowledge is self-defeating
since it depends on the very principles whose use is being called
into question. Both contentions are false: as we have seen, fideists
who have nothing but contempt for reason have repeatedly demanded from rationalists justifications of the principles of rationality
precisely and only to taunt these rationalists with the observation that
they cannot do so-and thus cannot live up to their own standards.
Far from defeating themselves, these irrationalists very effectively
undermine their opponents, for the argument may be used by an
irrationalist in order to defeat a rationalist on his own terms. This
ploy, which I call the tu quoque argument, has always been the most
effective argument in the armory of irrationalism. That is, fideists
use rational argument, including this one, in order to frustrate
rational argument; they use it not because they are committed to it,
but because their opponents are committed to it. They attempt to
turn the paradoxes of justification against would-be rationalists, and
thus to evoke in them a sceptical crisis-a crise pyrrhonienne.
In sum, while I concede the validity of the argument that one
cannot argue a man into a position, including the position of
listening to argument, unless he has accepted that argument counts,
Hirst's invalid argument is that one cannot ask for the justification of
rational activity unless one is already committed to it.
The purpose of the minute philosophy of this section has been to
show that not only the background context, and not only the
justificationism, of professional analytic philosophers is at fault.
There are other serious faults too, defects in the detailed working

For a related argument about presuppositions of logic in logical argument, see my The
Retreat to Commitment, op. cit., Appendix 5, as well as my "Rationality, Criticism, and Logic', op.
cit., sections 17-19.

JUSTIF1ATION AND RATIONALITY

out of the program of professional analytical philosophy. And neither program nor practice is very "analytical".32

6. Scientism and the Buddha
Although Popper rejects the scientific imperialism-the old "unity
of science" program-of the positivists, he nonetheless, in contrast to
Wittgenstein and the bulk of the philosophical profession, also
rejects the fragmentation and division of knowledge, and holds to a
basic unity of method underlying further growth of knowledge
(whether in biological adaptation or in science). As a consequence he
is sometimes accused of "scientism"-despite his long association
with the thinker who coined that word, F. A. von Hayek, and their
expressions of mutual agreement in rejecting just such scientism.

2 There is within biological thinking a line of speculation somewhat reminiscent of Hirst's
forms of knowledge. I am thinking of the ideas of biological archetypes and internal selection
associated with L. L. Whyte, W. H. Thorpe, Ludwig von Bertalanify, Arthur Koestler, Helen
Spurway, and A. Lima de Faria. Some of this is related to D'Arcy Thompson's great work On
Growth and Farm (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1942).
The idea of internal selection refers to the "coordinative conditions" (Whytc's term) of
biological organisation, conditions under which life may evolve at all. These conditions restrict the
range of possible mutations on the basis neither of the facts of the external ecological niche nor
of the internal dispositional state but rather on pre-competitive internal genetic grounds. This
kind of selection is intended to be non-Darwinian, and supplements Darwinian theory by adding
a separate source of selection, On this account, mutations reaching the external test have
previously been sifted internally. These organisational restrictions in effect define unitary laws
underlying evolutionary variety. While the number of variations possible is unlimited, they are
restricted to a limited number of themes, thus confining evolution to particular avenues not
defined or determined by external factors. Thus there is not only selection at the phenotypic level
but pre-selection at the molecular and chromosomal levels. (It is essential to the argument that
this pre-selection is not random or even blind in Campbell's sense.) Some discussions developed
along these lines are interesting, even though most biologists seem to believe that the limited
evidence for this kind of evolution can as easily be interpreted in a Darwinian way. In any case,
there is no evidence to suggest that Hirst or other Wittgensteinians even know about this line of
thinking, let alone that they would want to tie their own program to it,
If one takes an evolutionary and non-justificational approach, something somewhat resembling
forms of knowledge may remain, but no longer have most of the fundamental properties that
Hirst attributes to them. What remains would he akin to varieties, not forms. Within such an
approach, the fundamental speciation or demarcation that occurs within the structure of objective
knowledge is with regard to the sorts of selectors or criticizers appropriate to different kinds of
claims; moreover, all these presuppose a common organon of criticism. In disagreement with W.
V. Quine, I believe that such an organon is presupposed in any self-correcting, self-revising
system. Any further speciation that might simulate first's forms of knowledge must be subordinate to this complex underlying-and unifying-structure. (For a development of this argument
see my The Retreat to Commitment, op. cit., Appendix 5.)

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

Such an accusation has come from the Wittgensteinian philosopher H. L. Finch.n Finch argues that Popperian philosophy is
scientistically oriented, that it forgets that the progress and future
growth of science is only one amongst many values, and that it is
particularly oblivious to the precious insight of the great oriental
religious masters that stresses the value of living fully in the present
moment. Wittgenstein, so Finch believes, was different: he was fully
aware of this wisdom, and acted and developed his thought in
accordance with it.
This is all simply untrue. It is nonsense: not in the positivist
sense of being "meaningless", but in being simply cock-eyed. Let us
leave aside the question whether someone as clearly disturbed
(should I say "unhinged"?) as Wittgenstein could possibly have been
"living in the present moment" in the oriental sense, and consider
whether his philosophical approach, as opposed to his practice, was
like this. I too am interested in the many programs for the
transformation of consciousness which are deeply steeped in the
various oriental disciplines and religions, and particularly in Buddhism and in Zen.°4 In The Retreat to Commitment I identified three
"metacontexts" in which the search for knowledge and understanding takes place. One of these is the justificationist metacontext of
true belief shared by Wittgenstein and most of traditional and
contemporary professional philosophy (and which invariably leads
either to fideism or to scepticism); another is what I call the "oriental metacontext of detachment", rooted in Buddhism and in yoga; a
third is the nonjustificational fallibilistic metacontext. In that book
and elsewhere I indicated my rejection of the first, my deep sympathy but partial disagreement with the second, and my general agreement with the third.
It never occurred to me, in reporting and advocating elsewhere
the Buddhist and Zen emphasis on living in the here and now, that
I was in any way deviating from good Popperian practice. On the
contrary. Although some aspects of oriental thought are antithetic to
a Popperian approach and may indeed be more in the spirit of
Wittgenstein, this is not one of them. Rather, the whole point of

H. L. Finch, "Wittgenstein and Popper', in The Search for Absolute Values and the Creation of
the New World: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences, op. cit., pp.
1173-1190.
' See my Werner Erhard: The 73'an.sforination of a Man (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1978);
my The Retreat to Commitment, op. cit., Appendix I; and my "Rationality, Criticism, and Logic", in
Philosophia, vol. 11, February 1982, pp. 121-221, especially section IV.
252

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

living in the here and now is to attain detachment, which of course
includes detachment from our beliefs and theories, an eminently Popperian
goal. Beliefs and theories held in an attached or committed way fix
one in the past and in the future, and thus lure one away from the
"here and now".
Perhaps I may quote the Buddha-not as a precursor of Popper,
lest that appear irreverent, but as one with whom he shared an
important insight. The Buddha says:
It is proper that you have doubt, that you have perplexity .
Now, . . . do not be led by reports, or tradition, or hearsay. Be not
led by the authority of religious texts, . . . nor by seeming impossibilities, nor by the idea: 'this is our teacher."55
Referring to his own view, the Buddha states:
Even this view, which is so pure and so clear, if you cling to it, if
you fondle it, if you treasure it, if you are attached to it, then you
do not understand that our teaching is similar to a raft, which is
for crossing over, and not for keeping hold of.5°
This is plainly in the spirit of fallibilism, and goes very much against
what Wittgenstein teaches-even in its nse of metaphor. For to quote
Wittgenstein:
If the place I want to get to could only be reached by a ladder, I
would give up trying to get there . . . . Anything I might reach by
climbing a ladder does not interest me.57
Buddhists, like Popperians, realise that one needs rafts and ladders
(we call them conjectures) to get anywhere-including that evanescent space known as living in the present moment. It is not the use
of ladders and rafts that keeps one from living in the present
moment; rather, it is attachment and dogmatic commitment to those
rafts-for example, the belief that one has the right raft or the best
ladder. It is this attachment-whether deliberate or unconscious-which keeps one stuck in the past and fixated on the future,
and to that extent unable to grow.

Anguttara-nilusya, ed. Devamitta Thera (Colombo, 1929), p. 115.
Majjhima-nil'.aya, ed. V. Trenckner (London: Pall Text Society, 1960-1964), p. 160.
Ludwig wittgenstein, Culture and Value (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), p. 7e.
9

UNFATHOMED KNOWLEDGE

Like the Buddhist, Popper gives no importance to right belief,
and searches for a pervasive condition of non-attachment to models
and representations generally. For one must, on his view, detach
from and objectify one's theories in order to improve them. The
very asking of the Popperian question-"Under what conditions
would this theory be false?"-invites a psychological exercise in
detachment and objectification, a kind of intellectual yoga, leading
one to step outside the point of view shaped by that theory.38
Hence it is not surprising that Popper, the enthusiastic proponent
of "The Open Society", lays such importance on freedom of thought
and on toleration. Here too he is aligned with the Buddha. Indeed,
the freedom of thought and the tolerance allowed in Buddhism,
from the example of the Buddha himself to that of the Emperor
Asoka, to the present time, is quite astonishing and is particularly so
to one soaked, as are Wittgenstein and many of his followers, in the
blood-drenched dogmatism of the Christian tradition.39
Wittgenstein did pick up bits and pieces of oriental
thought-Tagore, for instance-but in the end he speaks firmly
from within the justificationist tradition, the tradition that emphasises not detachment but commitment to beliefs and indeed the
necessity of commitment to them. Thus in On Certainly, as we saw
above, Wittgenstein wrote:
Must I not begin to trust somewhere? - . somewhere I must begin
with not-doubting . . . regarding (something) as absolutely solid is
part of our method of doubt and enquiry. . . . Doesn't testing come
to an end?

Or as Norman Malcolm explains Wittgenstein's position: "The
framework propositions of the system are not put to the test."
Unlike Popper and the Buddha, Wittgenstein and Malcolm say
nothing of the critical examination of frameworks, and clearly believe
such examination to be impossible. They assume that what cannot
be justified also cannot be criticised. This so-called "conceptual
requirement" is self-serving and acts to reinforce their dogma,
buttressing established frameworks-such as inductivism and justificationism-and insulating them from criticism. It rules out in advance
the very idea that the problem of induction could be solved or that

See The Retreat to Commitment, op. cit., Appendix 1.
'° See Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught (New York: Grove Press, 1974), p. 2.

JUSTIFICATION AND RATIONALITY

criticism could be preserved where justification is impossible. Those
who are stuck, by whatever "necessity", conceptual or otherwise, in
their own frameworks, will never live in the present moment.
Rather, they will live in their frameworks, in their ways of life.

