IN PURSUIT OF TRUTH
Essays on the Philosophy of Karl Popper
on the Occasion of His 80th Birthday

Edited by
PA UL LEVINSON
\

(t

21).

f'.-

t4

with Fore words by
Isaac Asimov
and
Helmut Schmidt
Chancellor,
Federal Republic of Germany

I1b2.

z;-Ld1
HUMANITIES PRESS INC.
Atlantic Highlands, NJ

248

liv PURSUIT OP TROT/I

hope and no proof is Stoicism and Judeo-Christian religion, in which
irrationalism and stoicism alternate. Yet there is no inconsistency in the
philosophy of hope without proof, especially as a moral injunction to oiler the
benefit of doubt wherever at all possible. Now, the philosophy of hope without
proof is not exactly Popper's. It began with T. H. Huxley, the famous militant
Darwinian, and H. C. Wells. Its best expression is in Bertrand Russell's Free
Man's Worship," the manifesto of hope born out of despair, clinging to both
despair and reason most heroically. This famous paper, published in Russell's
Philosophical Essays of 1910, is a sleeper. It was hardly noticed by
contemporaries and followers, yet now it is the expression of current religion,
ofcurrent scientific ethos. Here, I think, Popper's philosophy of science gave it
substance.
Or perhaps Russell's "Free Man's Worship" gives Popper's philosophy of
science its proper bearings, its proper metaphysical framework. I cannot say.
For my part, I do not mind that I have no sense ofsecurity, no proof, no anchor,
but I do not like the sense of not seeing the wood for the trees, so I like to have
some idea of the wood, however fanciful, and attend only the details that my
idea directs me to or that are used bi critics of this idea. This gives me a great
sense of peace in my lack of orientation: I may be moving in the world with the
wrong map, but I am eager to improve it if and when I can, and I seek friends
who can criticize me. For this I am grateful to Karl Popper.

NOTES

0. 1 wrote this essay while I was an Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung senior fellow resident a
the Zentrum fUr Interdisziplinare Forschung. I3ielefeld, Germany.

A Popperian Harvest0
W. W. BARTLEY, III
It is by its methods rather than its subject-matter that philosophy
is to be distinguished from other arts or sciences.
A. J. Ayer, 1955'
Philosophers arc as free as others to use any method in searching
truth. There is no tnethod peculiar to philosophy.
-for
K. R. Popper, 19582

I. A Difficult Man
I. Late one afternoon in the early winter of 1960, 1 was sitting with Karl
Popper in the waiting room of his doctor's office on Harley Street in London.
Popper loved to spend time with his students. To cran in conversation with us, he
used his spare moments to the full. So we would tag along with him everywhereto the doctor's and dentist's offices, back and forth to the train station, on walks, in
taxis or on the underground-talking philosophy incessantly.
That afternoon we had been talking heatedly about the pre-Socratics. There
was a lull in the conversation, and I could see Popper's brows darken as an
extraneous thought flickered across his awareness. He turned to me:
"Bill, people say that I am a difficult man. Am I a difficult man?"
The reply bolted out of me unhesitatingly: "Karl, only a difficult man would
ask a question like that!"
2. I first heard what a difficult man Karl Popper was from my teachers at
Harvard College. When, in the spring of 1958, 1 told them that! would go to
London to study with Popper, they strongly discouraged me, warning me that I
would regret it. Later, when they learned that I did not regret it, they became very
angry with me.
By late September of that year, I was being interviewed by the Graduate
Registrar at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE). She
informed me of two things: that I could have the Ph.D. if! would stay at least two
years at the School and "write a very good book," and that my adviser would be
Professor. . . let us call him "X." I told her that I would be happy to write the
book, but that I had come across the ocean to study with Popper, and that if he

250

IN I'URSUIT OF 77WIlI

were not to be my adviser I would return to America on the morrow. She scolded
me and told me that I was being difficult.
The following morning I met my new adviser, Karl Popper, for the first time.
He was striking in appearance. The upper part of his body was well-proportioned
around a broad chest, but his legs were very short. On top of this peculiar body
there perched an imposing high-domed forehead framed by the largest pair of
ears I had ever seen. They \Vere pointed, almost elflike. But between them there
was a lovely face, handsome, proud, kindly, and very serious. His eyes were
trained directly on me, almost discomfortingly so. And I felt immediately-and
ever after-that I had his whole attention: there was nothing routine about this
interview.
We did not discuss the weather or life in London. He began the interview by
telling me that he disagreed utterly with the philosophical views ofmy teachers at
Harvard; and he summed up these differences succinctly. He then decreed, in his
thick Viennese accent, and constructing his sentences in the German manner,
that I wrote very badly (I had been asked to submit an essay and had turned in
one for which I had been awarded a prize) and that I would need to learn to write
better before I could expect to make any progress in philosophy. He went on to
explain exactly what was wrong with my essay: it was pretentious and in places
was unclear, masking confusion, uncertainty, or ignorance with a brilliant, or at
least eye-catching, style. I was, he told me, more interested in the cflct I was
producing than in reaching toward the truth. I do not know why; but from that
moment I loved him and knew that I could learn from him: that it would be worth
any difficulty that might arise.
3. A week later I first attended his seminar. The practice at graduate seminars
in England and America is for the student to read a paper, which is then followed
by questions and comments and general discussion from the other participants.
The professor may or may not enter much into the discussion: he or she chairs and
steers the meeting, serving as a kind of final authority designated in advance.
Popper's seminars were different: they were intense confrontations between
Popper and the person reading the paper-whether student or visiting scholar. At
this particular meeting, the student managed to read about two paragraphs.
Popper interrupted every sentence; nothing passed unchallenged: every word
was important. He asked a question; the student dodged it. Popper asked the
same question again. Again the student dodged it. Popper repeated the question
once again. And then the student answered at last. "Were you then wrong in what
you said first?" Popper inquired. The student evaded this unwelcome conclusion
with a flow of words. Popper listened, then said, "Yes. But were you then wrong
in what you said first?" The student was learning, and admitted his error. "Do
you apologize?" Popper asked. The student did so, and Popper smiled broadly:
"Good," he said. 'Then we can be friends."
Another student did not fare so well. He dodged Popper's questions, shifted his

I

•

A PoppriOfl honest

251

position without acknowledging it, ak'oided all criticism, appealed to the
audience, tried to deliver a speech, became more and more incoherent.., and
belligerent. Popper finally asked him to leave. He refused. Popper then took him
by the collar and threw him out of the seminar.
I later heard Popper explain his procedure. There was nothing easier, he remarked, than to nod sagely at a student and say that what the student wrote or said
was "interesting." But that is not teaching, and does not involve learning. That is,
rather, only the genteel ritual of academe. Certainly philosophical discussion
was for Popper no gentlemanly pastime; it was a battle on the frontiers of human
understanding and values. This caused many difficulties, but it also gave him an
extraordinary capacity to stir intelligence into active life in others. "I take my
students seriously," he would say. And he took their intellectual well-being as a
personal responsibility, motivated by the same kind of concern that led the
American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce to write: "It is terrible to see how
a single unclear idea, a single formula without meaning, lurking in a young man's
head, will sometimes act like an obstruction of inert matter in an artery, hindering
the nutrition of the brain, and condemning its victim to pine away in the fullness of
his intellectual vigor and in the midst of intellectual plenty."3
Popper had already as a student in Vienna dreamt ofone day founding his own
school, and writes in Unended Quest, his autobiography, of"a school in which
young people could learn without boredom, and would be stimulated to pose
problems and discuss them; a school in which no unwanted answers to unasked
questions would have to be listened to; in which one did not study for the sake of
passing examinations."4
Some members of Popper's seminar were, however, not ready for such a
school-and certainly not ready for the intense experience of being taken
seriously- and soon dropped out. Of the dozen or so who remained, at least six
did produce "very good books" within the next several years. These included my
The Retreat to Commitment (1 962), Joseph Agassi's Towards an Historiography
ofScience (I 963), Ian C. 3 arvie's The Re'olution in Anthropology (1964), Imre
Lakatos's Proofs and Rejiitations(1964), J. W. N. Watkins's Hobbes's System
ofldeas( 1 965), and A. I. Sabra's Theories ofLightfrom Descartes to Newton
(1967). The main parts of all these works were, I believe, read for the first
time in Popper's seminar during this period. Few seminars anywhere could
match such a record.
Preston King, later the author of The Ideology of Order (1 974) and Toleration
(1976), was also a regular member of the seminar. Another senior member ofthe
seminar was 3. 0. Wisdom, the author of The Foundations of Iiiference in
Natural Science (1952). The philosopher Ernest Gellner, author of Words and
Things (1959), was not a member of the seminar, but was on the LSE staff and in
close touch with many of the rest of us. Sir Ernst Gombrich, the author ofA,i
and Illusion (1 960), should also be mentioned. Although he was not a member

252

IA' PURSUIT OP FR UT/I

of the seminar, he was one of Popper's closest friends, and we saw him
frequently.
Each of the works mentioned reflects Popper's philosophical ideas; each also,
more deeply, shows his personal influence. His philosophical ideas-on
falsiliability, propensity theory of probability, indeterminism, theory of natural
deduction, the mind-body problem, objective knowledge, metaphysical research
programs, piecemeal social engineering, and so on, as well as his critiques of
Marxism, various branches of psychology, Platonism, Hegelianism, analytical
philosophy, and positivism-these he taught us in his formal lectures and in his
writings. In his seminars he taught us:
• You must have a problem, not a topic.
• Do not try to be original. Find a problem that excites you. \Vork
on it and take what you get.
• You must want to communicate to your reader; you must be
clear, never use big words or anything needlessly complicated.
("Write it for Tirzah," he would say-referring to Agassi's eightyear-old daughter.) Do not use logical symbols or mathematical
formulae, for instance, if you can possibly avoid it. Know logic, but
do not parade it.
• Itis immoral to be pretentious, orto try to impress the reader or
listener with your knovledge. For you are ignorant. Although we
may differ in the little things we know, in our infinite ignorance we
are all equal.
• Do not be attached to your ideas. You must expose yourself put
yourself to risk. Do not be cautious in your ideas. Ideas are not
scarce: there are more where they came from. Let your ideas come
forth: a,;' idea is better than no idea. But once the idea is stated,
you must try not to defend it, not to beliet'e it, but to criticize it and
to learn from discovering its defects. Ideas are only conjectures.
What is important is not the defense of any particular conjecture
but the growth of knowledge.
• So be scrupulous in admitting your mistakes: you cannot learn
from them if you never admit that you make them.
Although Popper fortunately has a sense ofhurnor, I can recall a few moments
when such unrelieved, intense dedication to uncovering the truth became
somehow out of balance, even comical. There was, for instance, the medical
doctor whom Popper was consulting for the first time. After Popper had
explained his symptoms, the unlucky doctor, preparing to announce a series of
tests that he wanted to make, commented: "Now of course I don't believe in
conjectural medicine."
"What do you mean?" Popper demanded. "Don't you realize that all

A Popprian /Ian','st

253

medicine is conjectural?" There ensued a twenty-minute lecture on the
methodology of conjecture and refutation-no doubt the only time Popper was
charged for giving a lecture.
4. When I first met Popper, it was hard to have a conversation with him. For
he would often interrupt what one was saying and begin a long and flowing
discourse; and there was no hope ofinterruptingonce that had started. This led
some people to complain that they could not get a word in edgewise. The fact is
that he was already quite deaf. Hence, taking up on a few cues, he conjectured
what was being said or asked, and replied to that. Often he was on target; but it
remained difficult to present one's own point of view in detail.
I found a way around this obstacle. I would write him letters, setting out the
issues that I wanted to discuss at our next meeting. This way he Itad an
understanding of my views and problems beforehand, and directed his
discussion accordingly when we met.
Modest in those areas where he had a right to be vain, and vain in those
where he had a right to be modest, Popper was reluctant to admit his deafness
to himself, and for years refused to wear a hearing aid. Finally, when he gave
the Sherman Lectures at University College London, an incident occurred that
changed this. He failed to hear the question raised by a visiting American
professor, and his reply was not to the point. Afterward the professor went
about complaining that Popper had "deliberately pretended to mishear" in
order"to dodge my question." When Popper heard this story he was upset that
anyone should think so of him. The next day he purchased a hearing aid, and
the problem diminished radically.
5. Popper made a personal impact in another way-as a person of
boundless vitality. I do not mean just the bubbling, overflowing genius of his
mind, which seemed to know of and to have thought deeply about everything.
This has, to be sure, always been extraordinary, and was remarkable even in
Popper's most obscure years-those nine years that he spent in New Zealand
during the l930s and I 940s. His New Zealand student Peter Munz, now
professor of history at the University of Wellington, reports Popper's
unselfconscious vitality and exuberance, throwing the chalk into the air and
catching it as he lectured. The geologist R. S. Allan, Popper's colleague in
New Zealand, recalls how Popper"strode up and down the room gesticulating
wildly and poured forth ideas." The historians of the University of Canterbury
report that "Popper's impact on the academic life of the College was greater
than that of any other person, before or since." They write that he "acted as a
kind of intellectual champagne after the dry depression years. . . . Staff and
students alike crowded his open lectures not for instruction or information, but
for enlightenment and the sheer intellectual joy of exploring the unknown with
him. "6

This energy was still astounding when I was his student in the late 1950s and
early I 960s. At age sixty, Popper used to run up the escalators on the deep

254

íA' PURSUIT OF Y'RUT/I

tube lines in London, two steps at a time, while 1, a young man oftwenty.seven,
struggled, panting, breathless, behind him. I do not know whether this was
owing to, or in spite of, his strict personal habits: he neither smoked nor drank,
and never ate more than a bar of Swiss chocolate for lunch. He did not impose
such habits on his students (although they were strictly forbidden to smoke in
his presence). Yet it is interesting that most of them do not smoke, and use
alcohol with great restraint, if at all.
The simplicity of his personal habits was reflected also in his home. Since
1950, he and Lady Popper have lived in the village of Penn, in the
Buckinghamshire countryside, an hour's train ride from London-secluded
from the interruptions of London life; and the peace of this retreat has given
him the opportunity to write.
I once asked him how they had selected Penn, but did not expect the answer
that was immediately forthcoming. "Oh, we decided on it when we were still in
New Zealand," he told me. In 1945, shortly after receiving his invitation to the
LSE, he got hold ofthe University of London regulations, which required him
to live within thirty miles of Senate House. He found a map of the area around
London, and drew with a compass acircle enclosing the permitted area. On the
western perimeter of this circle lay Penn, a spot that he and Lady Popper
already knew from before the \var. And they decided upon it then and there.
The house that they eventually acquired, on two acres, is tucked away on a
private road. Its living room is long, opening out onto the garden, where Popper
often takes Visitors to walk out his ideas. An Austrian peasant rug runs from
one end of it to the other. The room contains only live pieces of furniture: a
grand piano, which Popper plays (he also composes and was at one time a
member of Schönberg's Verein für musikalische PrivataufTUhrungen); a small
desk and chair; a bookcase filled with stories of the Arctic explorations: and
t\vo large wooden easy chairs, which sit at the end of the room next to the
fireplace. These chairs Popper had made to his own design (he was a
carpenter's apprentice in the I 920s), and he and his wife have been sitting in
them for decades. At the end of this room a door opens into a small study,
where Popperdoes his writing. Itcontains a large writing table and chair, a tall
cabinet where he keeps his manuscripts, and some loosely stacked bookshelves,
also designed by him, where he keeps those books that he needs at hand. There
is no television in the house.
6. As an undergraduate, \vriting for and editing The Han'ard Crimson, I
had a sense that the thinking and writing I did were connected with my culture.
I had a sense of audience, community, and task. My education of course came
in part from reading and hearing lectures; but it was acquired mainly by
growing four years older in extremely good company. As a graduate student
there, I began to feel boundaries where previously there had been freedom. The
boldness and vitality were gone-or, rather, a sense of sin overcast them. What

.4 I'opperian Ilanest

255

was left was narrowness, an absurd neurotic stuttering caution and wariness of
criticism-and irrelevance. Community was gone: what was left was "the
professional community"-what amounted to a bunch of rather insignificant
and conventional professors.

Working with Popper enabled me to regain my earlier sense of community
and high purpose. Association with him meant for me a permission-one of
course that ought not to have been needed-an irrevocable permission and
freedom to throw myself into the world of ideas, to think unfetteredly, to
experiment, to tackle problems self-critically yet boldly, to adventure withand to infect others with-ideas. It set at nought the academic cult of caution
and fashion: the cult of' those terrified to make a mistake. At some level I
already knew that important truism of psychology: that those who are afraid to
hurt other people will inevitably hurt them, that those who are afraid to err will
most certainly do so.
I do not think I ever discussed this with Popper, but he obviously knew it.
One could see this in the sense of sadness that seemed to overcome himsadness mixed with anger-whenever the question of "placing" one of his
students amongst the professional philosophers came up. He always discouraged
hi& own undergraduates from doing graduate work in philosophy or preparing
to enter academic life. As he later wrote: "It is very necessary these days to
apologize for bein,g concerned with philosophy in any form whatever. Apart
perhaps from some Marxists, most professional philosophers seem to have lost
touch with reality. And as for the Marxists-'The Marxists have merely
interpreted Marxism in various ways; the point, however, it to change it? "
When it did come time to find us jobs, he did his best to discourage that
aspect of our ambition which was concerned with finding fashionable and
comfortable (and corrupting) niches for ourselves. The only point of having a
professorship, he would say, was to have ajob in which one got paid for doing
what one liked. One of his students came in forlornly one day to report that he
had been offered a job at a small and undistinguished college with a high
teaching load. That did not matter at all, Popper advised him. Since the
students would not be very bright, one would just teach them at half the
ordinary pace; so the teaching load would not matter. What mattered was
whether one would have the conditions to learn, to grow, and-if one had the
talent-to write. Popper himself had thought through his basic philosophical
ideas when he was a carpenter's apprentice in Vienna. And until his mid-thirties
he had been a high school teacher.9 His first two books, Die beiden
Grundprob!eine der Erkenntnistheorie and Logik der Forschung, had been
written at night, after a hard day's teaching.
Popper was eager to put across his ideas, and disappointed and sometimes
offended that he was not more successful in doing so, for he was passionately
convinced of their importance to Western culture, and to the defense and

256

IN PURSUIT OP TR UT/i

enhancement of the open society. But he had not the slightest interest in
academic politics. And he took it for granted that his students would have
similar priorities.
7. Karl Popper is a difficult man. My own relationship with him, to be sure,
seemed almost idyllic for seven years. We did not quarrel once during this
time, and my fellow students and colleagues wondered at and teased me about
this. Finally, in 1965, we did have our quarrel: afterwards we did not speak for
twelve years. And now we are friends again. This is a long story, for another
time and place. I mention it here only to avoid giving a distorted picture of our
relationship. For this essay I have another purpose.

II. His Contribution to the Philosophy of Science
8. In this essay I want to consider not the man Karl Popper but the real
harvest of his thought. I have already indicated that a problem arises, both for
Popper and for myself, with regard to the philosophical profession. This
problem will emerge as a kind of theme for this essay, in an attempt to illuminate
the discussion of intellectual revolution.
There is a widespread impression-created in part by a superficial reading
of Popper's own writings 10-that the process of scientific revolution is very
simple: that a fact is found that conflicts with a theory; and that the theory is at
once dropped and a search undertaken for a new theory. By extension, this
view may be applied to philosophy: that when an argument on which a
philosophy rests is refuted, that philosophy is immediately dropped and gives
way to a new philosephy-or at least to the search for a new philosophy. And it
is supposed that it is the professional community of scientists-or philosopherswho do the deciding: who determine when one viewpoint has been refuted and
another is to be put in its place. However the facts may be, many would
maintain that the scientific and philosophical professional communities-and
the elite of these communities-should decide when such a shift should take
place (see Section 20, below).
Yet ifwe look at the reception of Popper's own revolutionary new ideas, we
find that no such process has taken place, and that the process that has taken
place is more complicated and interesting. For although Popper's philosophical
ideas have been widely acknowledged by the scientUic elite-including
numerous Nobel prizewinners and other Scientists who stand at the very peak
of scientific achievement-they are widely dismissed or ignored by the bulk of
the professional philosophical community.
In this essay I want to begin to consider both the scientific acceptance of and
the professional philosophical resistance to the Popperian revolution. This
essay will touch only the surface of this problem, making use of an example

A Ipp.risi I/arrest

257

that seems to provide an iIluminatingcase-stUdy for the philosopher or
historian of science-and one with wider cultural ramifications as well. It is
indeed curious that, during the past two decades, in all the discussion,
Popperian and otherwise, of the sociology of paradigms and paradigm shifts,
no one has examined the paradigm shift.associated with the rise, development,
and assimilation of Popperianism itself, or the social and institutional
questions connected to that.
In the present, second, part of this essay, I shall first sketch the development
of the profession of philosophy of science and its chief problems, showing how,
just when the profession of philosophy of science was first organizing, the
fundamental theory of the philosophy of science was in chaos. I then will turn
to the main outlines of Popper's own solutions to these problems, and his
resolution olthe crisis in philosophy of science. Finally, I shall sketch the very
different response to crisis taken by the bulk of the philosophical profession.
9. Professional philosophy of science was born in Austria and Germany,
and is, as I write this, being vigorously revived in those countries. It has
become so prominent, and so influential, in the English-speaking countries
during the last four decades, that it is easily forgotten that in the l930s
philosophy of science, as an independent discipline or profession, barely
existed. There were, of course, classically important English-language works
in the field-such as those ofM ill and Whewell-and all the main problems of
the subject were part of the philosophical curriculum. There were also some
philosophers who did philosophy of science professionally; but the greater part
of these were newly arrived, of Austrian or German origin, émigrés to the
English-speaking countries from the prewar positivist centers of Vienna,
Prague, and Berlin. During the preceding six decades, most of the best-known
philosophical treatments of issues in the sciences, in English, were not even
written by professional philosophers. Among these authors, W. K. Clifford
was a mathematician; Karl Pearson, a biologist and statistician; John
Maynard Keynes, a polymath, an insurance executive, an economist; Joseph
Needham, a biologist; Sir Arthur Eddington and Sir James Jeans were
physicists, as was P. W. Bridgman. Charles Sanders Peirce could not keep an
academic post, and spent most of his career working for the United States
Coastal and Geodesic Survey.
It would be easy to find exceptions to this list-C. D. Broad and Bertrand
Russell most conspicuously-but the point has been made.
This situation began to change in the I 930s, as a result of the crusading
positivism of the Vienna Circle, and of the emigration of its members to
England and America. In the chief doctrines of the Vienna Circle, there was
already a strong basis for communication with English-speaking philosophers.
The public organization formed by members of the Circle had been called the
"Ernst Mach Verein," after the Austrian physicist, psychologist, and

258

IN PURSUIT OF TR UT/I

philosopher Ernst Mach (1838-1916). ' The Viennese championing of
Mach's sensationalist ideas as the basis for the understanding of physics
reminded English-speaking philosophers of a part of their ovn heritage that
had been in eclipse during the nineteenth century. Several eighteenth-century
British philosophers had deeply influenced Mach-David Hume and,
especially, Bishop Berkeley.'
One result of this shared background and newly focused interest in the
philosophy of science was the journal Philosopin' of Science, which began to
publish in the mid-I 930s. But only in the late 1 940s and early I 950s-with
such events as the organization ofthe Philosophy of Science Group (later the
British Society for the Philosophy of Science), the founding of The Bii (is/i
.Journalfor (lie Philosophy of Science, and the creation of strong graduate
programs in philosophy of science at Minnesota, Iowa, Berkeley, London, and
elsewhere-did the profession really come into being.
I put some importance on this point because it is easy, in surveying the
publications and problems that have shaped the past four decades oldebate in
philosophy of science, to forget that these same years mark the creation of a
profession-an event that would in almost any field be bound to have a
distorting effect on the subject itself. One such eftect is that particular
emphases present in the late 1940s and 1 950s, at the time of the organization
of the profession, have tended to be institutionalized and perpetuated.
I shall return to this profession later. First, I want to review very briefly-for
they are treated at length elsewhere in this volume-some of the chief issues of
the philosophy of science as perceived by this profession.
10. The first two issues to be considered are the problems of induction and
demarcation. Both of these, and particularly the first, concern the relationship
between evidence and what is evidenced. On the inductivist and empiricist
approach that is associated with the Humean doctrine that nothing is in the
mind that is not previously in the senses, sense observation reports are seen as
the only legitimate source, justification, and evidence for other contentions.
The problem is that there is no way logically tojustify or prove the universal
laws of nature by appealing to singular observation reports, however many.
Statements of law are more than combinations of observations; they are of
stronger content than the evidenciary statements used in defending them.'3
This problem had been stated in antiquity by Sextus Empiricus, and little
progress on it had been made since then. The positivists of the I 930s and
1 940s had no way to solve it, but supposed that it could be circumvented
through the application of probability and confirmation theory; that observation
reports might not logically entail law statements, but nonetheless would make
them more probable, and thus "confirm" them.
The probabilistic approach, developed by John Maynard Keynes, Rudolf
Carnap, and others in the 1 920s and 1 930s, \vas in serious trouble by the late

259

A I'opjwriwz I/arrest

I 940s, as shown by the publication of the "paradoxes of confirmation" by C.
0. Hempel and Nelson Goodman, who argued, among other things, thatwithin such an approach-every instance of non-A "confirms" a hypothesis of
the form "All A are B." Thus an observation of a red herring confirms the
hypothesis that all swans are white; the observation of a green emerald today
confirms that tomorrow all emeralds will be blue.'5 The positivists had tied up
nature in colored tape-red and otherwise.

The problem of demarcation is closely related. In the 1 930s, 1 940s, and
1 950s, under the influence of the positivists and of Wittgenstein, philosophers
of science tended to conceive it as one ofdemarcating meaningful utterancesthat is, those that are logical or scientific-from those that are meaningless.
The aim of such demarcation was, as expressed in Carnap's famous ezsay,
"Die Ueberwindung der Metaphysik durch logische Analyse der Sprache,"
the elimination of metaphysics, including all philosophy of value and
normative theory)6 Alleged statements in this domain were taken to be, as
Carnap put it, "entirely meaningless" pseudo-statements. One avoided
these-and here was the demarcation-by making no utterances not reducible
to or probabilistically confirmable by sense observation reports. This position
is imperialistic (see Part IV, below) in the sense that all legitimate statements
are required to conform to what are supposed to be the standards of logical and
scientific discourse.'7
All this is a truncated version of an older and wider problem. Consider the
following chart:

good traits

bad traits

true
clear and distinct
probable
empirical
scientific
verifiable
meaningful

false
unclear and indistinct
improbable
unempirical
nonscientific
unverifiable
meaningless

Where ideas compete, it is obviously useful to be able to demarcate good ones
from bad ones. But what makes an idea good? The left-hand column of my
chart suggests how philosophers have answered this question. The right-hand
column indicates traits to be avoided. During modern times, attempts to find a
criterion of truth have in general been abandoned; and the deficiencies of
Descartes's criterion ofclarity and distinctness were shown by Kant. Yet most

260

IN /'URsUIr OF 7R UT/I

of the remaining "good traits" held sway. It was widely assumed that any good
theory would combine the remaining left-hand traits: it would be more
probable than its rivals, and also be empirical, scientific, verifiable, and
meaningful. Whereas if one of these characteristics were lacking, the others
would be lacking too: thus a nonempirical, unverifiable, and nonscientific
statement would be meaningless.
The difficulties of induction and the "paradoxes" of confirmation and
probability theory took their toll here too. The proposed criteria of demarcation
simply did not work-and were prevented from working by the problem of
induction. Scientific laws turned out to be improbable, unverifiable, and
meaningless. Whereas some metaphysical statements were both probable and
verifiable. 18
In sum, in failing to solve these two problems, professional philosophers of
science demonstrated their inability to give a coherent account of the
relationship obtaining between scientific theories and evidenciary observational
reports. Worse, any such account seemed in principle unattainable.
11. One aspect of the demarcation problem deserves emphasis. It is
interesting that the problem was expressed as one ofdemarcating science from
nonscience. A characterization of science is obviously important in general
cultural terms. Two of the most strident motifs in our intellectual life are the
effort of science and nonscience to come to grips with each other, and the effort
of science to find out just what it is that makes it scientific. Many fieldsreligion, philosophy, history, social science, psychoanalysis, psychology,
sociology-characterize themselves, understand themselves, by contrast to
and in comparison with "the sciences." An understanding of the nature of
science is hence-literally-a prerequisite of self-knowledge for other
disciplines. Since the most widely accepted notions of science-based on the
unworkable positivist demarcation-are incorrect and even incoherent; and
since most discussions in other disciplines, including philosophy, are
nonetheless framed in terms of the supposition that the positivist account of
science is correctfor science, most disciplines are now mischaracterized by
their own proponents-and are, as it were, methodologically "neurotic" as a
result. It is often and correctly remarked that academic ideology in the Marxist
countries is distorted, particularly in the social sciences, because of its reliance
on a false Marxist characterization ofscience. But in the West, the most widely
accepted characterizations of science are also false.
12. The problems were not all methodological. The impact on the emerging
profession of philosophy of science of Einstein's theories of relativity,
particularly in their bearing on the understanding ofspace and time, can hardly
be overestimated. Let me mention briefly just two examples.
The first is Kant's problem of the infinity or finitude of the universe with
regard to space and time. Kant argued that these issues produce contradictions

A /'oppc'r:(I'' I icirves

26 I

that are in principle unresolvable, the so-called "antinomies of pure reason."
He appeared to be able to prove, both of space and of time, that they were both
finite and infinite. Einstein hoped to resolve the problem regarding space with
the idea of a universe that is both finite and without limits, but his efforts have
now been abandoned. With regard to tihe, the issue is even more complicated
and also remains unresolved.
A second problem, raised by the logician Kurt GOdel (1906-1978) in 1949,
has to do with the question of whether relativity theory has idealistic
implications.'9 The relativity of simultaneity implies, for the most part, the
relativity of succession. Thus the assertions that A and B are simultaneous, and
that A happened before B, lose objective meaning, and depend on the observer.
This provides a proof, Gödel concludes, that supports the views of Kant anti of
modern subjectivists and idealists to the effect that change is an illusion arising
from one's mode of perception. It can be shown that there are some worldspossibly including our own-wherein one can, by making a round trip in a
rocket ship in a sufliciently wide curve, travel into any region of the past,
present, or future, and back, just as one familiarly travels to other parts of
space.
Notwithstanding the consensus one finds in science fiction, there is as yet no
agreement about the implications of GOdel's argument; but the possibility he
demonstrates of anomalies of temporal order in general relativity gives rise to
the question, as Howard Stein puts it nicely, "to what extent the existence or
non-existence of a univocal time-ordering along all time-like world-lines is
susceptible of manipulation (by the physicaLrearrftngement of matter) within a
given cosmic model."°
13. If relativity theory seemed to give some support to idealistic and
subjectivist positions, quantum mechanics gave very much more. This was
especially so in its Copenhagen Interpretation (usually credited to Niels Bohr,
Werner Heisenberg, and Wolfgang Pauli). For the behavior of electrons and
photons seemed to breach both the laws of nature and the laws of logic. The
behavior of waves is essentiallt' different from that of particles. Yet nature
appeared to manifest itself, on the microscopic level, in these two contradictory
ways: sometimes as waves, sometimes as particles; and the transitions from
one manifestation to another took place, impossibly, at superluminal velocities.
Moreover, the role of the observer was argued to be crucial, thus dissolving the
distinction between subject and object: when electrons are looked at, their
distribution is different from the way it is when they are not. As the physicist
Eugene P. Wigner put it in his Symmetries and Reflections: it was not
possible to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics in a fully consistent way
"without reference to the consciousness."2'
14. There has also been a problem about the status of scientific theories.
For most of the history of science, it was agreed that scientific theories were

262

iN PURSUIT OF TR UT/i

attempts to represent and hence explain the physical universe.22 During this
century, however, the philosophical doctrine of instrumentalism-according
to which laws of nature are not descriptive but on!;' instruments or tools for the
organization of phenomena-has been widely accepted. An instrumentalist
approach had already been part of the Machian philosophy that lay at the basis
of logical positivism; another important influence came from a French source:
the great work on The A un and Structure ofPht'sical Theor;' by the French
theoretical physicist Pierre Duhem (1861-191 6).27 Instrumentalism got its
greatest boost, however, from quantum mechanics, in the form ofNiels Bohrs
principle of complementarity. A way of handling the contradictions and
conflicts in quantum theory, it amounted to forsaking the attempt to represent
the world in a consistent coherent model, and settled for using the formalism of
the theory, in application to single experiments, for instrumental or pragmatic
purposes of prediction, organization, and control.
Instrumentalism also provided a way to deal with the difficulties of induction
and demarcation; and by the same token, the difficulties of induction and
demarcation helped pave the way for The acceptance of instrumentalism. To
accept induction-even to insist upon it-despite its own logical incoherencv,
and despite the paradoxes that had arisen in attempts to state it coherently,
amounts to treating the theory of induction instrumentally too. For it was the
aim of representation and explanation that had required consistency in the first
place. Instruments, tools, do not iteed to be consistent, for they do not pretend
to explain.
15. 1 have indicated briefly some of the main problems and issues of the
philosophy of science as they were often stated some thirty to forty years ago,
and as they are still widely understood today. By putting them in a neutral way,
it is easy to give the impression that they were ordinary, and relatively minor,
problems. Nothing could befurt/ierfrom the truth. At the very moment when
the profession ofphilosophy ofscience was organizing, the fundamental theory
of the philosophy of science was in a state of collapse. Yet this was not
acknowledged. Rather, there was a glorification of contradiction, and even
paradox, almost as if it were a sign of profundity. As a way of dealing-or not
dealing-with the crisis, the importance of real anomalies was played down.
And at the same time pseudo-paradoxes flourished)4 Sponsored by instrumentalism, this attitude expressed itself most revealingly in the simultaneous
prizing of formalism (including logical formalism) and practical contempt for
logic. Complementarity, for instance, rescued the Copenhagen Interpretation
from contradiction on an ad hoc basis. The same sorts of moves were taken in
positivism, in confirmation theory (and also in certain other areas that. I cannot
probe here, such as behaviorism in psychology, and linguistic analysis), thus
rendering the wider ideology that included all of these into a reinforced
dogmatism-a dogmatism strengthened by "good reasons" why the strongest

.1 I'opperuin Ilanest

263

criticisms should not be taken seriously. Criticism was thus sealed off,
diminished, explained away in advance. Evidence of this appears in hundreds
of writers. Few, however, attained the eloquence of Hilary Putnam, of
Harvard University, who wrote:
In this sense "induction is circular." But of course it is! Induction
has no deductive justification; induction is not deduction.. . . The
fact that ajustification is circular only means that that justification
has no power to serve as a reason, unless the person to whom it is
given as a reason already has some propensity to accept the
conclusion. We do have a propensity-an a priori propensity, if
you like-to reason "inductively," and the past success of
"induction" increases that propensity. . . . Practice is pririiary.26
To argue in such a way is to legitimate dogmatism. For practice is not
primary"; it is just practice. To have a propensity-inclination or predisposition-to accept something that would, apart fro,n such a predisposition,
be unacceptable is precisely what is meant by "to be prejudiced" or "to act as
judgc in one's own cause." One aim of rationality and of traditional scientific
civilization has been to review prejudices, attachments, propensities (a priori,
natural," or otherwise), and practices, and to subject them to examination,
restraint, and criticism. A good reason-as opposed to a rationalization-is
one that works independently of a priori propensity.
16. It was into this crisis situation that the revolutionary ideas of Karl
Popper were broadcast in January 1959, with the publication of TheLogicof
Scientific Discover;'.
Popper's ideas had, of course, been published long before, in 1934, in his
native Vienna, as Logik derForschung. But as the storms of war gathered, the
philosophers of science at the great centers of Vienna, Prague, Berlin, and
Warsaw were already dispersing, many of them, like Popper, being of Jewish
descent. The first edition of Logik derForschung thus had a limited circulation.
And during the war itself, Popper was removed from the scene, teaching in the
obscurity of New Zealand. He did not return to Europe-to the London School
of Economics-until early 1946; and at that time he became known first as a
social and political philosopher, a philosopher of history, and a historian of
philosophy, as a response to his The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945), and
The Pot'eri;' of Historicism (1944 and 1957).
The Logic of Scientific Discovery is, however, the theoretical work on
which his historical, political, and other studies depend.27 In it Popper was
able, simply and straightforwardly, to resolve many of the outstanding issues in
the philosophy of science. I mean this literally. In what Popper would call
World 3-the world of abstract argumentation-the problem of induction is

264

IN I'URSUIT OF JR U/U

solved, and the verificationism and inductivism that lay behind it are refitted.
Popper shows that induction does not exist.28 Rejecting the empiricist theory
of learning as primitive and in conflict with biological knowledge, Popper sees
the mind as no passive "bucket" into which experience simply rains and which
can, at most, recombine that experience in various ways. On the contrary, the
mind actively anticipates the future with hypotheses that, of necessity, go far
beyond experience: hypotheses precede observations psychologically, logically,
even genetically: all experience is theory impregnated. Every animal is born
with expectations-that is, with something closely parallel to hypotheses,
which, if verbalized, express hypotheses or theories. The role of experience
is to break expectations: to criticize and to challenge hypotheses. The ability of
an animal to learn will depend on the extent to which it can modify
expectations contradicted by experience, on the extent to which it is able to
invent new expectations or theories to deal with unanticipated situations)9
In terms of this argument, Popper shows that the relationship between
theory and observation is deductii'elv logical after all. There is a basic
asymmetry between the verification and the falsification of a theory: although
no amount of observations could ever verify a theory logically, one single
observation may falsify it, serving logically as a counter-example to it.30
Here there is limited use of probability to evaluate statements and no
confirmation theory whatever. The paradoxes associated with probability and
confirmation, and stressed by Hempel and Goodman, simply do not arise for
Popper (see note 15).
How then are hypotheses or theories to be confirned? They are not to be
coajirined. There is no way to confirm-that is, to prove, verify, make firmer,
make more probable-any theory ofany interest. They are and remain forever
conjectural. There is no certain knowledge. What is done-and what has been
mistaken for confirmation-Popper calls "corroboration." For a theory to be
corroborated is simply to have been tested severely and to have passed the test.
Such a theory is not made more probable thereby: it may fail a yet more severe
test tomorrow."
17. Popper's approach to demarcation flows immediately from his treatment
of the problem of induction. To demarcate science from nonscience Popper
proposes the testability or falsifiability criterion. For what would science have
to be? Not the systematic body of confirmed, probable, verified theories
envisioned by positivists.32 Rather, it consists of a nexus of problems, theories
put fonvard to solve them, and tests made of them. A scientific theory is one
that is testable or falsifiable: that is, in potential conflict with possible results of
observation.
Whereas Humean verifiability excluded not only wild speculation but also
most of the highest achievements of science, falsifiability makes a more
effective cut: most acknowledged scientific theories are in potential conflict

A I'opperian Ihin'st

265

with sense experience (and thus empirically criticizable); vheeas most
religious and many speculative statements are untestable. No empirical
observation, for instance, stands in potential conflict with "God exists,"
"There are angels," "There is an afterlife," or "There is a fountain of youth."
Such unrestricted statements of existence are often untestable as a result of
their form alone. Other theories-Popper cites as examples those of Freud,"
Adler, and Marx-are untestable (and unscientific) because they contain
stratagems for deflecting empirical criticism.34
The relative untestability of Marxism and psychoanalysis indicates low
content and relative weakness-"the more a theory forbids, the more it says"
is one of Popper's slogans. In this respect they contrast with the more
developed sciences: "What impressed me most," Popper writes, 'was
Einstein's own clearstatement that he would regard his theory as untenable ifit
should fail in certain tests."33
Untestability has, however, nothing to do with meaning: untestable statements
may stand in logical relations with testable statements and thus cannot differ
from them with regard to meaningfulness. (Moreover, Popper explains how the
positivist preoccupation with meaning stems from an interesting error: the
classical logical paradoxes had indeed been able to be resolved-and had
dissolved-through meaning analysis; and it was mistakenly assumed that the
traditional problems of metaphysics would similarly disappear under meaning
analysis. But there is a decisive difference between the traditional logical
paradoxes and the traditional problems: the paradoxes are produced by selfreference, whereas self-reference is absent in traditional philosophical problems.
Hence the parallel fails.)
This does not imply that scientific theories are the only "good" ideas. Many
valuable theories, particularly in early stages of development, will not be
testable. They may, however, be criticizable in other ways: they may be shown
to fail to solve those problems that they purport to solve; or to solve other
problems; or to contain self-immunizing stratagems for deflecting criticism; or
to be internally incoheient! Many ideas important in the history of science,
although not testable, acted as "metaphysical research programmes" and
principles of interpretation, guiding and sponsoring scientific research. These
have included atomism and Darwin's theory of natural selection in their early
stages of development.3' Two other untestable viewpoints, determinism and
indeterminism, mark an issue of great importance in the interpretation of
contemporary quantum theory.38
18. Although Popper does not use probability to evaluate scientific
theories, he sees the question ofthe interpretation ofthe probability calculus as
the key to the solution of the chief problems of quantum theory. Th
interpretation of quantum theory, he argues, hinges on whether one attributes
subjective or objective status to probability statements in physics. What does it

266

IA' /'URSUII OF JR Ulil

mean, for example, to say that the probability of a photon passing through a
half-silvered mirror is one-half'? According to the subjective interpretation, this
means that, due to our ignorance of the relevant initial conditions, we have no
more reason to expect the photon to pass through than to be reflected.
Whereas, on the objective interpretation, this means that nature is indifferent
between letting it through and reflecting it back.
The objective interpretation seems, on the face of it, more reasonable. It
seems preposterous to suppose that pennies fall or molecules collide randoriily
because we are unaware of initial conditions-and that they would do
otherwise if these conditions were known to us.
Nonetheless, the majority of physicists adopt a subjective interpretation.
Their reason for this is twofold. First, existing objective accounts of
probability-the so-called "frequency interpretation," for instance-have
been importantly inadequate, being unable to handle probabilities for single
events. Second, most physicists presuppose what Popper calls metaphi'sical
determinism, and thus cannot possibly accept an objective account of
probability. For a metaphysical determinist, nothing is really, objectively,
only probable: everything is exactly fixed. Relative to a complete knowledge of
all the laws of nature and all initial conditions, the probability of any possible
event is either one or zero. Hence probabilities with intermediate values, as in
quantum mechanics, can refer only to the state of information available. The
upshot is that quantum mechanics is ordinarily presented as a report of our
knowledge about particles, not as a report of objective reality.
To combat this, Popper provided his propensio' interpretation of probability,
which is not subject to the defects of the frequency interpretation. And he
developed a series of arguments on behalf of metaphysical indeterminism39
Popper's account of quantum theory requires no move to instrumentalism to
protect it from paradox or anomaly.4° In estimating the status of scientific
theories he himself opts for a realist, representationalist4' point of view.
After beginning his work with philosophy of physics, Popper went on to
develop new foundations for logic and probability theory, and then established
another reputation as a social and political philosopher. In Popper's hands
these are not separate areas, but are closely connected: indeterminisrn in
history is integrated with indeterminism in physics; and criticism of theories,
with rational reform of social institutions. In his later years, he has turned his
attention to another area barely hinted at in his earlier work: biology and
evolutionary theory. The new work is not simply incremental: it unifies all his
thought. In The Logic of ScientUic Disco veiy, Popper had urged epistemologist.s
to approach their task through the study of the most advanced forms of
knowledge: scientific theories. Now he turns also to primitive and prehuman
forms of knowledge, and to evolution, for examples of the growth of
knowledge, maintaining that "The main task of the theory of knowledge is to
understand it as continuous with animal knowledge; and to understand also its

A I'opperian Ihjnest

267

discontinuities-if any-from animal knowledge." Epistemology becomes a
science of comparative cognitive apparatuses.12
Both scientific theories and the biologically based cognitive structures of
animals interest Popper as objective.structures of knowledge achievement.
Both are produced by the same Darwinian mechanism: the highest creative
thought, like animal adaptation, is a product of blind variation and selective
retention.
In his most recent work, The Self and Its Brain (1977), written in
collaboration with the Nobel prizewinning neurophysiologist Sir John
Eccles, Popper turns to the mind-body problem, where he develops an
interactionist theory that is also anti-behaviorist and anti-materialist.
1 9. Popper's life's work thus poses a striking challenge to conventional
theories of science. At a time when most philosophers of science are
inductivist, subjectivist, positivist, instrumentalist, behaviorist, materialist,
monistic, Popper is deductivist, realist, anti-positivist, anti-instrumentalist,
anti-behaviorist, anti-materialist, interactionist. The significance is not simply
in the attack: theories of science have been challenged before, often in
connection with ideological defenses of religion, or for political purposes. No
such motive lies behind Popper's work. Rather, it is a fundamental reexamination
of the philosophy of science from ;t'ithin science and on behalf of a more
adequate scientific world view. A methodology deeply dependent on historical
studies, it is applicable to all fields and disciplines, to the extent to which they
aim to achieve more adequate explanations and descriptions.
Throughout, Popper's work contrasts sharply with that of the positivists and
his other predecessors and rivals. Although Popper, like the positivists, made
important contributions to logic and physics, his work is not minute. There is a
largeness and boldness about his ideas-a flowing ruminative expansiveness
that denies the "two cultures." And they have an amazing scope-ranging
from physics through biology to sociology, political theory, theory of
education, Greek history and philosophy, and even the history of polyphonic
music.44 As if electrically charged, he drew an original spark from any subject
he touched.
It would be absurd to suggest that Popper's theories resolve all legitimate
controversies in the philosophy of science. For instance, although he has
written on the theory of time, he has not contributed in a major way to relativity
theory; nor do his ideas resolve the problems in relativity theory mentioned
above.45 Moreover, his work in quantum theory, which is major, is in part
hostage to the theories of Alfred Landé, which have never been rigorously
examined. Various aspects of Popper's methodology are also defective: his
theory of demarcation is sometimes clumsy in application, and is defective in'
various other ways; his theories of verisimilitude and corroboration are also
inadequate.46
Nonetheless, his work leaves philosophy of science in a state utterly

268

IN /'URSUIT OF JR Ui/I
A Popperian harvest

different from that in which professional philosophy of science was born in the
late I 940s.

III. His Reception by the Profession: Con Lamento
20. In the preceding part, I have indicated briefly the nature of the crisis in
philosophy and philosophy of science, and of Popper's resolution of it.
How then has his work been received? Has his resolution been accepted and
incorporated into the framework of professional philosophy?
Not at all.
Had Popper's work been widely kno\vn when it was first published, in 1934,
it would perhaps have had a greater impact on the philosophical profession.
But it was subjected to a long delay: published in a limited edition in German
immediately prior to the interruptions in communication caused by \Vorld
War II, The Logic of Scientific Disco'eri' was, during the war, repeatedly
plagiarized and garbled. When it was finally published in English in 1959, it
was greeted warmly in Britain. Richard Wollheim called it "one of the most
important philosophical works of our century," and Sir Peter Medawar called
Popper"inomparably the greatest philosopher ofscience that has ever been."
The anonymous reviewer in the Times Literari' Supplement remarked that the
book had "that quality of greatness that, once seen, it appears simple and
almost obvious," and went on to speculate: "One cannot help feeling that, if it
had been translated as soon as it was originally published, philosophy in this
country might have been saved some detours."17
The impact of all this on professional philosophy was, however, marginal.
Between 1 934 and 1959, two separate professional ideologies had become
entrenched in the philosophy departments of the English-speaking universities.
One of these was professional philosophy of science, the outgrowth of the
crusades of logical positivism; the second, curiously encompassing the first,
was the cult of ordinary language and of the later Wittgenstein.
Institutionally and professionally, these still dominate. They have captured
graduate departments ofphilosophy and characterize, even define, "professional
philosophy." By the 1950s, logical positivism had, on the whole, been
modified by and incorporated into the general framework of the philosophy of'
the later Wittgenstein (see Part IV, below). A relatively easy shift, it was
exemplified not only in Wittgenstein's own development but also, say in the
contrast between Sir A. J. Ayer's Language, Truth and Logic (1935) and his
The Problem of Knowledge (1956); or in Morton White's brilliant attempt to
reconcile positivism, pragmatism, and language analysis in Toward Reunion
in Philosophy (1956). Positivism and Wittgensteinian philosophy sit well
together; for Wittgensteinian philosophy can tolerate positivism as an account

269

of the "language of science," even where it rejects its wider claims. Neither,
however, can tolerate Popperian philosophy, which attacks the fundamental
presuppositions of both, and cannot be assimilated to or digested by either.
Thus in the World 3 of abstract argumentation, verificationism and inductivism
are refuted-and objectively so. But in the World 3 of professional institutional
arrangements and in the World 2 of philosophers' minds and loyalties, this
abstract World 3 event has had comparatively little effect, apart from raising
defenses.
In consequence, Popper and his followers are not true participants in the
contemporary professional philosophical dialogue woven by these two schools.
Rather, Popper has ruined that dialogue. For if he is on the right track, then the
majority of professional philosophers the world over have wasted or are
wasting their intellectual careers. The gulf between Popper's way of doing
philosophy and that of the bulk of contemporary professional philosophers is
as great as that between astronomy and astrology.
The dialogue may have been ruined; but it continues. It is one in which
Popper's work is either ignored or radically misunderstood. By reading
professional journals, one would not gather that the problems discussed above
indeed have been solved. Inductivism continues as before; and a philosophy
that presupposes the insolubility of the problem of induction dominates all
professional discussion.
A good example of the ignoring of Popper's work is Just(Jication and
Knot'ledge (1979), a book of essays by some of America's best-known
epistemologists, including Keith Lehrer, Roderick M. Chisholm, and Wilfrid
Sellars. As George Pappas, its editor, proudly reports in his Introduction:
"The literature on epistemic justification . . . in English-language journals and
books is vast and growing all the time."49 The entire discussion of this book
was, however, rendered completely obsolete by Popper's work in the 1930s,
and by some extensions to it that I made in the early 196Os.° Yet Popper's
name is mentioned in the work only once, in passing and inaccurately, in a list
of names.
An example of the misunderstanding-or garbling-of Popper's views is N.
M. L. Nathan's Evidence and Assurance, published by the Cambridge
University Press in 1980.' Nathan states that "Critical Rationalism"(the name
given by Popper to his position, and widely used to refer to it) assumes that the
rigorous examination of a theory ensures that it is probably true, and that
Critical Rationalists want to "guarantee the truth or probable truth of what is
rationally believed". On the basis of these assumptions, he accuses the position
of vicious infinite regression and other difficulties. Yet Popper, Hans Albert,
and I (the three Critical Rationalists under discussion) have explicitly denied
these assumptions, and Popper has denied them, literally, ad nauseam.
Cambridge University Press would be unlikely to publish a work attributing to
Einstein a belief in the luminiferous aether, but it publishes a work-no doubt

A Popperian honest
270

271

IN PURSUIT OF TR UTI!

refereed and approved by "experts" from the philosophical professionattributing to Popper and his followers preciselj' those ideas that thet' have
spent their lives denj 'ing.
Yet such experts are the "professional elite" that this same kind of
professional philosophy-and the sociological philosophy that it has spawnedwishes to set up as authoriative. The authoritarian, elitist tenor of the dominant
community of contemporary philosophers is reflected everywhere in its
publications. As one example, there is "Justilication and the Psychology of
Human Reasoning," published in PhilOsophy of Science, the organ of
American professional philosophy of science. Its authors counsel that there is a
higher court of appeal than an individual's own "reflective equilibrium."
Namely, it is that of his "cognitive betters." "There are," these authors write,
people in our subject's society who are recognized as authorities on
one or another sort of inference. . . . He need only seek out the
experts and ask them. The role of experts and authorities in cur
cognitive lives has beer all but ignored by modern epistemologists.
Yet it is a hallmark of an educated and reflective person that he
recognizes, consults and defers to authority on a wide range of
topics. . . . One of the principle effects of education is to socialize
people to defer to cognitive authorities. . . . Deference to authority is
not merely the habitual practice of educated people, it is, generally.
the right thing to do, from a normative point of vew.52
These authors appear to be the type oI"right-tliinking men" to whom Sartie
refers when he writes: "To the right-thinking man, to be alone and to be wrong
are one and the sarne.'3
Harold I. Brown's Perception. Theory and Coninzii,nent: 77w Neii
Philosophy of Science conforms to this authoritarian, expert-oriented,
deferential mood. Thus Brown argues for a relativistic conception olscientific
truth according to which the truth ofa scientifietheory reflects or is a project on
of the consensus of the scientific community, and a theory is false when it is
rejected by that community; and ii the scientific community has made no
commitment, then the theory is neither true nor false.54
How seriously can one take such self-interested professional proclamations
of professional authority?
Not very. In fact, fartoo much attention is paid to these professional "elites."
It is of course useful to know how they operate-and even to see that they are to
a certain extent indispensable in intellectual communities in contributing what
Campbell refers to as the "stability requirement."5 Yet from many of these
discussions of elites, and from the work of Thomas Kuhn and various
sociologists of knowledge, one might gather the absurd autistic idea that
intellectual issues are settled in university departments. Most of this writing is

done by American academics, department-oriented "team men" who have
only a glimmering awareness of any wider cultural terms of reference. Thus
what we hear of is the sociology of growth within schools of professionals, and
the sociology of strife between schools of professionals-as if philosophical
ideas mattered only to professionals, and were to be arbitrated by their own
self-determined "elites."
In determining Popper's real influence, one has to make a sharp distinction
between the general culture, including science, and the profession of philosophy.
The impact of his ideas on science and on cultural and intellectual discourse
has been immense-particularly in Germany and in England.s6 And he has
won as disciples and working colleagues independent people of intellectual
standing comparable to his own. Among the most distinguished of these areSir
Ernst Gombrich, the art historian; Donald T. Campbell, the psychologist; F.
A. von Hayek, the economist; Sir John Eccles, the neurophysiologist; Sir
Peter Medawar, the biologist; and Jacques Monod, the biochemist, Hayek,
Eccles, Medawar, and Monod are all Nobel prizewinners-just as Popper
himself has joined Winston Churchill, Albert Schweitzer, Bertrand Russell,
Arthur Koestler, and Niels Bohr as the winner of Denmark's Sonning Prize."
Another Nobel laureate, Konrad Lorenz, although never an associate of
Popper's, has also acknowledged the close bearing of Popper's ideas on his
own. Some evidence of the way in which Popper has reached the general
public became apparent in 1978, when The TuneS Higher Education
Supplement printed a critique of Popper by an Oxford philosopher. There
were dozens of letters of protest from the general public, some of them printed
in subsequent issues. Most of the responses printed, although clearly
competent, were by members of the public unknown to the professional
community-including Popper's group.59
It is indeed in that country where intellectual life is most professionalized
(i.e., segregated from the general culture)-the United States-that Popper's
work is least widely recognized. Campbell is the only American in the list of
Popper's associates given above. And if we turn to the next generation, to
Popper's own chief students-Joseph Agassi, Hans Albert, I. C. Jarvie, Imre
Lakatos, A. I. Sabra, Paul K. Feyerabend, J. 0. Wisdom, J.W.N. Watkins,
and myself-one finds that I am the only American among them. As Ernest
Gellner has so aptly expressed the matter: "if the several thousands or more of
professional philosophers in America were all assembled in one place, and a
small nuclear device were detonated over it, American society would remain
totally unaffected."6°
In Britain, where there exists a strong intellectual culture independent of the
universities, the professional situation is different, Even thoroughly academic and
professional philosophical thought plays a role in British culture through the BBC,
the Titnes Literary Supplement and Times Higher Education Supplement,

272

hV I'URSU/T 01 JRUJll

through public lecture programs, and distinguished journals for the educated
public such as Encountei; The Economist, and The New Scientist. In that
wider culture Popper is an important literary and scientific figure, a bestselling author, a major influence.6' In Britain, despite the self-isolating effects
of linguistic philosophy, it is still recognized that some of the main issues in
physics, psychology, and biology are philosophical in character and of deep
cultural relevance. The professional British philosophers may on the whole be
intellectuals without ideas-like the characters in Angus Wilson's novels or the
author ofA. 3. Ayer's autobiography.62 Yet this does not matter so much, since
the culture remains sufficiently integrated to prevent the self-isolating tendencies
of professional philosophy from being fully put into effect. Similar remarks
could be made about Germany, and about Popper's reception thee during the
past decade.63 Whereas in America the self-isolating tendencies are virtually
u nc heck ed.
21. The situation just discussed is bizarre: the scientific, literary, and learned
communities of Europe are acclaiming Popper; and his own profession disowns
him. In a remark to me, he himself perhaps put it best: "Here I am being
showered with honours as no professional philosopher before me; yet three
generations of professional philosophers know nothing about my work."
However one may judge this, and explain it, one thing is clear: the
it'idespread current discussion among professionals about the role of
professional elites in determining the acceptance and influence of ideas
throws virtually no light on a case like this. For here several overlapping yet
distinct communities (or econiches) make very different judgments and
decisions. The professional discussion of such matters has had no clear point
of reference; no clear econiche is specified; yet evolutionary survival is always
relative to some specific econiche that the organism (or group) itself' in part
selects and creates. Likeself, and closely related to it, communi' is a World 3
creation in Popper's sense.64
Such confusion is hardly surprising. Nor does it appear only in contemporary
philosophy. It appears also in contemporary psychology, and even in physics.
For it is not as easy as it was (see Section 6, above) to identify one's audience
and the community for which one is writing and thinking. With the decline in
standards of education, in university and cultural budgets, in the graduate
schools, in the standards of literacy throughout the \Vestern world, and in the
book publishing industry, those who inhabit the world of ideas face an
ecological crisis-a crisis whose resolution demands a sharp confrontation
with and a deep rethinking of the entire question of community. Separated as it is
from the wider culture, the "intellectual community" threatens to dissolve into
a loosely federated band of "disciplinary" craftsmen-federated less by a
common tradition or shared values as by the need to exert concerted pressure
to gain financial support.
Like any econiche, a community is characterized by the possibilities or

A l'opperi(Ifl / (U n''s:

273

potentialities that are open to it-whether as yet discovered or not. Its future
survival will depend on whether, and the way in which, it exploits these
potentialities. But professional groups often function not to open up possibilities
but to close them out. Here a narrow conception of culture and community
operates, in which these are characterized by current presuppositions and
practices, rather than by as yet undiscovered potentialities.
22. Does the situation matter? What are the chances of the survival of the
Popperian approach?
To answer this question, one must bear in mind that all evolution,
intellectual and otherwise, occurs in three distinct and indispensable phases or
rhythms. To consider the question of the survival and propagation of a
Popperian approach to philosophy, one must fix which econiche (or community)
one is discussing, and must look at how it is doing on each of these three levels
within the relevant econiche.
These three phases or rhythms are:
I. Unjustified variations on existing forms (sometimes called "random
v a ri at ion'') 63

2. Systematic elimination and selection.
3. Retention: duplication, transmission, and preservation of selected variations.
On the first level, that of unjustified variation, Popper and the group around
him are doing splendidly, both in terms of the professional communities and
the wider culture. There have been some remarkable developments of his
position, including Ernst Gombrich's application of it to art, and D. T.
Campbell's application to biology and evolutionary epistemology. And a
series of important mutations-monsters, hopeful and otherwise-have sprung
from the midst of the Popperians. One is the philosophy of Paul K.
Feyerabend, which wildly overemphasizes the role of unjustified variation
(i.e., theoretical pluralism) in the growth of knowledge.66 Another example
would be my own early work, an unjustified variation that emphasizes the
unjustified character of both variation and selection, and which perhaps
overemphasizes the role of systematic elimination (i.e., unjustified criticism)
in the growth of knowledge.67 Then there is the mutation that is the philosophy
of Imre Lakatos-a cumbersome mutation built on misreadings and of poor
construction.' But it has a beautiful tail and is widely attractive to professionals.
On the second level, systematic elimination and selection, the position ofthe
Popperians is ambiguous. They are under attack not only from the professionals,
but from one another: within the group there has been self-destructive internal
dissent. One Popperian became so alarmed by this that he wrote, in some.
exaggeration, that "instead of a coherent philosophical position, one finds a.
lightly disguised squabble of alley cats."69
On the third level, that of retention-propagation, transmission, duplicationthe Popperians are, as we have already seen, doing poorly within the

274

iN PURSUIT OF TRUl II

professional econiche.'° If the professional econiche were all there were, they
would be doomed to extinction; for as D. L. Krantz has written: "Ideas without
recruits become like Bishop Berkeley's unheard fallen tree."" Within the
profession, Popperians have been minimally effective in duplicating themselves,
transmitting their approach and tradition, propagating. They hold no positions
of influence; even in their own departments they are "marginal men";" they.
are widely dispersed and have no regular meetings and no oflcial journals;
they arc not awarded research grants; their publications are sometimes
blackballed;" there is no bibliography of their publications, and these
publications are scattered among many dilIereiit journals throughout the
world; many oftheir findings are not being utilized and developed; they have no
graduate school (with the possible exception of the LSE) from which to
generate new professional philosophers oltheir own persuasion, or to inculcate
that "tacit knowledge" whose importance Polanyi emphasizes. And even if
they did, there are no longer many jobs available for any professional
philosophers ofani' persuasion, due to the decline in university enrollments in
Britain and America. Thus, in terms of the profession, the Popperians clearly
do not meet the "structural requirements" that Campbell has specified" for a
"self-perpetuating social system" that is a vehicle for scientific knowledge.
Rather, within the profession they form an "encapsulated and self-isolating
school of thought" of the sort that Krantz sees as most likely to appear when
fundamentalassumptions are in question." Thus, if one were to restrict one's
attention to the profession, it would be difficult to be optimistic about the
survival of the Popperian approach. For in the professional econiche that is
conventionally thought to provide the route for the study, development,
application, dissemination of ideas-that. is, the system of graduate educationthe gates are guarded and secured by an ideologically hostile professionalism
If one looks at the question of transmission more broadly, however, the
situation looks different. The philosophical profession, as it is at present
constituted, seems-at least to me-to be an evolutionary dead end: like the
arthropods whose brains are built around their gullets. Many professionalsespecially in philosophy, but also to a certain extent in physics, medicine, and
psychology-are the products of isolation and inbreeding, and the departments
that they inhabit provide econiches unfavorable for the evolution or propagation
of revolutionary new ideas. Such ideas-and civilization-emerge through
contact and communication, not through specialization in isolation.
On this latter ground, the Popperians have been more adaptive, and have
outflanked the profession. Like Popper himself, they address the wider
community (although their plentiful academic'' publications also attest to their
professional competence). Unlike th professional philosophers, most Popperians
live intellectually in several diverse cultural groups: the profession and the
wider scientific and literary culture; also unlike the professional philosophers,

A I'opprian lIanest

275

they live much more internationally, and are less confined to their national
professional associations. Thus their apparent weakness may in fact be a great
strength.
The Popperians are then marginal ipen in the sociological sense. Although
marginality can freeze people with anxiety and resentment,'6 it can alsowhen successfully managed-be the source of creativity.'1 The marginality of
the Popperians has provided them with the opportunity, in negotiating among
conflicting communities, values, and ideologies-as well as the incentive-to
develop objectivity and perspective, as well as that creativity that consists in
rendering what is given problematic.
In terms of survival, what matters to the Popperians is, first, that they
communicate to the public and disseminate their ideas thereby. Here there is
evidence of their success in dealing with their marginality. Second, they must
create a nurturing intellectual environment for themselves. Here there is the
evidence of their having failed to deal fully with their marginality.
But does ii inn tier i'h ether the Popperian approach top1: ilosophy survives?
No: not, at all. That is, unless it is correct.
IV. The Intellectual Position of His Opponents:
The Wittgensteinian Problematic
23. There are many reasons for this deep divide between Popperian
philosophy and that of the philosophical profession. Some are historical,
psychological, sociological, and personal. But there is also an intellectual
obstacle. In this part, I would like to reconstruct what Popper would call "the
logic of the situation"-in terms of what I shall call the "Wittgensteinian
problenlatic"-the very different route that the bulk of the philosophical
profession has taken in response to the crisis that I outlined in Part II of this
essay. It is easy to see this opposition as simply hostile, and to ignore the
problematic that forces the position. By becoming clearer about this, we can
identify where vigorous rational argument would be most relevantly and
effectively applied-to the extent that the opposition is amenable to it.
In examining philosophical viewpoints, one has to attend carefully to at least
three separate aspects: (a) their tenets and the problems they claim to have
solved; (b) their problematic; and (c) their research programs.'8 These
different aspects may not be equally well known or equally influential. Thus
one philosopher's influence may come chiefly from the problems he or she has
solved, whereas the influence of another philosopher-who may indeed not
even have solved any problem-may come chiefly from the research program
that he or she has sponsored.
The thrust of Popperian philosophy is clearly theory and problem oriented.
Thus I can, in a preliminary way, define Popper's position in the history of

276

IV PURSUIT OP TRUTh

thought, and indicate my own relationship to him, in a sentence: with his theory
of falsifiability, Popper solved the problem of induction and made an
ingenious, but somewhat defective, solution of the problem of demarcation;
moreover, by generalizing and somewhat correcting Popper's theory of
criticism, one can solve the problems of skepticism, fideism, and rationality."
All this renders traditional epistemology-and much of the rest of traditional
philosophy-obsolete.
Popper's problematic, the nexus of background, influences, and problems
that he exploited in building his philosophical outlook, cannot so readily be
summarized, depending as it. does on a historical account. But it is readily
available, in his own work and in that of others.°
With Wittgenstein, the situation is different. It is not easy to identify any
philosophical problem that he can be said to have solved, or any new
philosophical theory that he propounded. Ifone turns to the work olthe young
Wittgenstein, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (192 1), one must qualify
this judgment a bit, for in that work Wittgenstein did attempt to dispense with
Russell's theory of types through arguing that to know the sense of a symbol
definitely and completely is to know all its possible combinations; and that one
thus need not in addition state its range of applicability. This view impressed
Russell, and was, as Russell put it in his Preface to the Tractatus in 1922, "not
at any point obviously wrong." It vas, however, refuted by the work oIChurch
and Gödel in the l93Os.8
Wittgenstein's influence stems, rather, chiefly from the research program
inspired by his later philosophy. I shall discuss this below.
It is, however, the relatively unappreciated Wiugensteinian problematic
that I want to discuss first; for this is rarely articulated. And here Popper and
Wittgenstein clash most dramatically. By reconstructing the logic of the
situation that leads people into Wittgensteinian philosophy in the first place,
•and then traps them there, we may better appreciate what the key issues must
be. For Popper's significance here lies in having undermined the agreed
problematic that sustains Wittgensteinian thinking.
In my view, one problem-and only one problem-lies at the root of the
Wittgensteinian problematic and at the root ofthe split between Wittgensteinians
and Popperians. This is the old problem of induction. If the problem of
induction remains insoluble, then philosophy may take the path the professionals
have staked out. If Popper has, as he claims, solved the problem olinduction,
then professional Wittgensteinian philosophy is a mistake, and continued
work in that vein is wasted.
In other words, the problem is not merely one of fashion. I do not want to
follow Bertrand Russell when he wrote of his own displacement by the
Wittgensteinians: "It is not an altogether pleasant experience to find oneself
regarded as antiquated after having been, for a time, in the fashion. It. is difficult

.4 I'opperian hones:

277

to accept this experience gracefully."" Bertrand Russell's experience both
caters to and lies outside the Wittgensteinian problematic. For Russell could
not solve, and did not claim to have solved, the problem of induction, even
though he was preoccupied with it throughout his life and found its solution of
overriding importance." Wittgensteinian philosophy, on the other hand,
begins with the conviction-the correct conviction-that the problem is
insoluble in Russellian terms, and proceeds from there: from its viewpoint,
Russell's work is antiquated.
In the following, therefore, I propose to offer a historical reconstruction of'
the problem situation that leads to the development of contemporary
professional philosophy; and to show how this development hinges on the
assumption that the problem of induction cannot be solved. The entire matter
looks very different indeed from a perspective, such as the Popperian one,
within which the problem of induction has been solved.
24. 1 shall proceed in this way because most professionals come in-and
settle in-in the middle of the story, as it were, and never have the opportunity
to look at the development from a perspective in which it is anything but
necessary or desirable.
(1.) To generate our problem situation, we need, as a start, a scientjJic
ialis,n of the sort available in logical positivism. I refer of couiTEe
claim that all legitimate utterances are to be judged in terms of the canons and
criteria of science, conformity to which is assumed as a hallmark of progress
and intellectual advance.
The positivist idea that sense observation is the foundation of all knowledge
works together with elementary logic to create a universal theory of criticism
and explanation of error. Thus, if pure sense observation is the one and only
true source of knowledge, and ifsuch reports of sense observation serve as the
only premises in argument, their truth will be transmitted to the conclusion of
that argument. On this account, any legitimate (i.e., properly sourced or
justified) theory would be one derived logically from, and justified in terms of,
such premises, and an unacceptable theory would be one that cannot be so
derived. Error stems from the acceptance of a theory (or pseudo-statement)
that cannot be derived logically from sense observation reports.
(2.) Next, we need to generate an epistemological crisis. It is noticed-and
it is about time that it waoticed!-that many perfectly legitimate scient file
claims cannot be justified in the way demanded. As explained earlier, every
universal law of nature is too strong to function as the conclusion of a valid
argument whose only premises are sense observation reports. There is no way
logically to reach from a finite set ofsuch reports as premises to a universal law
of nature as conclusion. And the problem is of course largei: not only are
scientific laws not derivable from sense observation reports; various principle
supposed to be indispensable to science-including principles of induction,

278

IN PURSUII

vi:

7/JJJ/

verification, and causality-also cannot be derived from sense observation
reports. In short, the principle of criticism that was advanced simply does not
work. And it appears that the relationship between evidence and conclusion
must be illogical. Illogic is at the heart of science.
(3.) The next, crucial, step in our developing problem situation is toauempt
to resolve the crisis. It is asserted, often as if triumphantly, and even as if
profoundly, that th relationship between evidence and conclusion is not
i/logical, only non-logical. There are two kinds ofinference: there is deduction
which defines logic; and there is induction, which defines science. Induction is
indeed not deductive; but there is no need for it to be so. "Everything is what it
is and not another thing." A pseudo-problem was artificially created by the
unwarranted imperialistic assumption that the canons of science have to
conform to the canons of logic; whereas, in fact, induction is not afaultt' sort of
deduction. Rather, induction is ultimate, defining science-just as deduction is
ultimate, defining logic. As Wittgenstein put it: ' Here grounds are not
propositions which logically imply what is believed .... For the question here
is not one ofan approximation to logical inference. . . . That is an inference; but
not one belonging to logic." Thus the problem of induction is "dissolved" by
learning not to apply the standards of logic to inductive inference.85
The philosopher should then, so it is contended, not judge between
deduction and induction, not judge induction by deductive standards. Rather,
his or her job is to describe and attempt to make clearer the standards and
principles of deductive and of inductive reasoning, as they are embedded in
actual practice.
(4.) A question is now raised. Why not extend the whole process a step
further? For there exist other disciplines and "forms of life" that are neither
logical nor scientific. There are, for instance, history and jurisprudence and
religion and politics. In the past, such disciplines have frequently been
criticized, even by their own practitioners, by ference to logical and scientific
standards. Yet if logic cannot. be permitted to judge science, can science be
permitted to judge other disciplines?
(5.) A negative ansver is quickly provided. Each discipline or field or
"language game" or"form of life," it is said, has its own ungrounded ultimate
standards or principles or "logic," embedded in action, 86 which need not
conform to any other standards and which it is the job of the philosopher to
describe. As Wittgenstein says: "As if giving grounds did not come to an end
sometime. But the end is not an ungrounded presupposition; it is an
ungrounded way of acting."8
(6.) But this means that there is no arguing orjudging among disciplines-or
different activities-any more. Logic cannot judge science; or science, history;
or history, religion. There is a spangled diversity. Scientific imperialism makes
way for disciplinary independence-some might say anarchy. The fragmentation

.1 1 tIJIJIL

of the university and of the community is given a theoretical justification; and
in this theoretical justification itself resides all that remains of unity and
community. Whereas the positivist or empiricist explanation of error provided
a universal theory of criticism, the new explanation of error that arises here
does away with such criticism: philosophical error is now thought to arise from
the imposition of standards in usage in one area on other different areas.88
Philosophical error is no longer (a in positivism) attributed to the use of
utterances that are not logically reducible to reports ofsense observations. Yet
the concern to eliminate philosophical error perversely remains: and its chief
source-that is, the chief source of "the bewitchment of our intelligence by
means of language"89-is to apply the rules of one activity, of one language
game, to another. Language will trespass its limits, or "go on holiday," when
particular sorts of expression are used outside their proper domain or range of
application. Philosophical critique becomes critique not of content but of
criteria application: the activity of showing how language may stray from its
proper place and then bringing it back to its correct context. Taken as a whole,
empiricist philosophy may itself be regarded as one grand "category mistake,"
that of supposing that different language games must satisfy the criteria of one
supremely authoritative language game: that of science. Yet, there is nothing
wrong, so it is contended, with an empiricism within its proper limits:
empiricism isa/I ri,g/iiforscience: it expresses the principles behind the shared
practice of the community of scientists.
(7.) In the course of this argument, the nature of philosophy has been
recharacterized. Contemplating their discovery that the empiricist theory of
criticism could not work, philosophers have reached the conviction that any
general philosophical theory of criticism is impossible. To criticize, to
evaluate, to explain, these are no longer proper philosophical aims: what
remains to the philosopher is to describe the logics or grammars of various
kinds ofdiscourse and activity,,he many different sorts of language games and
the forms of life in which they are embedded.
A new explanation of error-and later Wittgensteinian thought certainly
ranks as such-has often, in the history of philosophy, led to a program of
reform whose aim is to create conditions under which such errors will no longer
arise. So it is here. Wittgenstein himself never claimed that all identifiable
disciplines and activities in which people engage are separate language games
each with its own sets of rules. Many of his followers, however, did just this,
supposing that each individual activity-law, history, science, logic, ethics,
politics, religion-has its own special grammar or logic; that mixing the
grammar of one of these with that of another leads to philosophical error; and
that it is the new job of the philosopher-his new research program9° under the
Wittgensteinian dispensation-to describe in detail these separate logics or
grammars. In this spirit two generations of British and American professional

280

IN PURSUIT OF TRUTh

philosophers came to write books with titles such as The Vocabulari' oj
Politics, The Language of Mora is, The Logic ofMoral Discourse, The Logic
of Historical Explanation, The Language of (Literari) Criticism. The
Language of Fiction, The Uses of Argument, The Logic of the Social
Sciences, The Logic ofthe Sciences, The Province ofLogic, The Language of
Education, The Logic of Religious Language, Fa it/I and Logic, Christian
Discourse, The Language of Christian Belief The Logic of Colour Words,
and so on ad nauseam.
Any philosopher, whether well-seasoned in his or her subject or a budding
Ph.D., was thus provided with a simple "research formula" whereby a book or
learned paper could be produced: "Take one of the phrases 'The Logic of.v,'
'The Language ofx,' or 'The Grammar ofx,' substitute forx some activity or
discipline such as just named; write a treatise on the topic so created." The
easiness with which such programs could be carried out goes far to explain
the immense success of such philosophizing-as witness to which I should
mention that each of the titles cited has decorated a book or monograph
actually published.9
And yet, latent in all this is a new imperialism, generally unconscious,
according to which disciplines or forms of life must conform as follows: rue
forms of life (a) must not judge one another; and (b) must not try to describe
some common world in collaboration with another discipline since each form
of life creates its own world. In this new imperialism the nature of philosophy is
recharacterized-and the opportunity of community is lost,
(8.) The essentials of our problematic have now been set down: but some
important matters have not yet been mentioned. There is, for example, the way
in which this whole line of thinking has been reinforced by positive reactions on
the part of other disciplines. Colonized subjects may of course be expected to
rejoice in the difficulties of their masters; and so it is here.
Take as an example the case of religion. Quite interestingly, one can find in
much philosophy of religion of the past fifty years a development almost
exactly parallel to (although largely independent of) that in professional
philosophy. Traditional apologetic philosophy of religion had also been
imperialistic, insisting that findings in other areas of human life at least
conform to those of religion. With the great theologian Karl Barth, however,
one finds the rejection of apologetic theology and the substitution for it of
kerygmatic theology, wherein the job of the theologian becomes simply to
describe the basic-and ultimate-presuppositions of Christianity. Consequently, it comes as no real surprise that philosophy of religion and
philosophical theology have been given a new lease on life by the Wittgensteinian
problematic.92 For the self-conception of such disciplines now matches the
professional characterization ofthe wat' all disciplines and ways of ljfe must
be.
(9.) One final element in the problem situation lying behind contemporary

.4 Popperian I/arrest

28!

professional philosophy should be noted. Though it is psychological and
sociological in character, there is no doubting its importance. The development
discussed provides what amounts to a recipe for generating a team-style
department of philosophy, in which one professional does logic, another does
science, and so on-where "does" means to describe the logical structure, the
"grammar" of various established fields. The activity of old-fashioned
positivism may even remain here: that is, formalism and the descriptive
analysis of the methods and presuppositions of the natural sciences and logic.
What must be sacrificed is not the activity but the judgmentalism of early
positivism. There is a "live and let live" attitude-subsumed under a common
paradigm wherein it is assumed that the problem of induction is a pseudoproblem, insoluble on its own terms because those terms are misconceived.
Thus it is that Ludwig Wittgenstein, for all his trials and tribulations, never
had to battle for recognition-for he told the professionals what they wanted
to hear. It is consoling for all those isolated from the wider culture to be
reassured that it is all right to "do their thing," and-ironically, through "team
work" with colleagues-to continue to destroy rather than to create community:
that their usage and activity, whatever it may be, is indeed authoritative,
25. This entire chain of argumentation, and the problematic that it
constitutes, depend on the first steps: the claims that sense experience is the
foundation and justification of all knowledge; that there exists induction and
that the problem of induction cannot be solved nor the scientific method
charted while deductive logic is retained. When these claims are shown to be
invalid, as Popper has done, the entire argument unravels, and a whole
generation of philosophizing is intellectually undone.
\Vithin the Popperian perspective an alternative program of criticism is put
forward that develops critical methods consistent with, although not restricted
to or limited to, science; methods that are positively applicable to and to be
integrated with the examination of all fields to the extent at least to which they
are devoted to uncovering and discovering the truth, to the extent to which such
fields aim at explanations, representations, descriptions of the universe in
which we live, and to the extent to which they aim at increased "fit" in
Campbell's sense.93 The growth of science is assimilated into a critical
evolutionary perspective that provides a theory of growth generally.
Hence when one considers the question of how ideas improve with regard to
their lit to the environment-the question of their correspondence to realityany question of their justJication is as irrelevant as any question about
whether a particular mutation isjustified (or foresighted, or suitable in advance
of natural selection, in the Lamarckian sense). Nor does survival justify or
guarantee the survivor: a species that survives for thousands of years may
nonetheless become extinct. And a theory that survives for generations may
eventually be refuted-as was Newton's.
All disciplines are seen as evolutionary products that, as far as their

IN PURSUIT 0 1RUI ii

intellectual viability is concerned, are to be subjected to critical examinationan examination that includes the critical review of their fundamental principles.
There are no longer any principles that are fundamental in the sense of being
beyond criticism and examination. There is no methodpeculiarto philosophy
orto science or to logic (see epigraphs to this essay). The same general critical
method is universal. Moreover, it is only now that the question can arise as to
what extent the methods of the sciences are applicable in other areas.
A false understanding of the methodology of science led to a "research"
program that characterizes contemporary professional philosophy; a new and
correct understanding of the methodology of science leads, however, to a very
different research program for philosophy and undercuts the assumptions on
which the previous "research" was based. The recharacterization of science
leads to a recharacterization of virtually ever)' other discipline(see Section II
above).

V. The Popperian Harvest
26. In this section I should like tastate very briefly, without elaboration, the
main achievements of the Popperian work and perspective.
1.) Popper solved the problem olinduction, in all its classic manikstations.
(2.) His solution to the problem of induction proved to be e.vemp/art', in the
first sense that Thomas Kuhn gives to the term "paradigmatic."" Exactly
comparable. approaches, using the same strategies and ideas, could immediately
be applied to all the main problems of epistemology and methodology: the
is/ought problem; the problem of other minds, of the external world, of the
uniformity ofnature, of the existence of the past, of the existence of matter, of
the existence of physical space, and of time independent of perception. This is
no arbitrary listing of episternological problems. These are the problems
treated by Bertrand Russell in his classic work The Problems of Philosop/n
(1912), and by A. 3. Ayer in his The Problem of Knowledge (1956) and The
Central Questions ofPhilosophp (1 973). The)' are Hume's epistemological
problems.96
(3.) Thereby classical epistemology-and also most of meta-ethics-is
rendered obsolete. All classical epistemology can be shown to depend on a
mistaken fusion of justification and criticism.91
(4.) In place of classical epistemology, a new et'olutionarv episteniologt',
at once descriptive and normative (or methodological), is introduced. This
epistemology is embedded in a metaphysical outlook rooted both in biology
and in physics and in a characteristic ,noralitp and posting of goals oriented to
the advancement of human self-knowledge and knowledge of the universe.
This approach specifies the metaphysical, philosophical, and scientific
presuppositions of the open society; and it argues that these presuppositions in
fact obtain in our universe-the open universe in ts'hich something comesfrom

283

A Popperian harvest

nothing." This aspect of the Popperian perspective is paradigmatic in Kuhn's
second main sense: it. identifies a constellation of views and values: a viewpoint
about one's own self-nature and the naUre of consciousness, about the nature
of society and of the universe in which one lives.
(S.) Popper's solution to the problem of induction proved tobe exemplary
not only for epistemology, but also foç a variety of other subject matters. Thus
Gombrich applied it to the theory of learning and to the history of art;
Campbell applied it to biology and evolutionary theory; and Watkins applied it
to ethics. Tyrrell Burgess and H. J. Perkinson have more recently applied it to
educational theory-which of course is appropriate in that educational theory
is one of the chief sources of the entire Popperian perspective.99
(6.) Although exemplary and paradigm-shifting from the very start, Popper's
approach originally contained no explanation of its own power, no identification
of the source of its originality. I provided such an explanation and identification,
and thereby generalized the approach, in the course of my own resolution of the
problems of skepticism and presuppositions. The source of the power of the
100
Popperian approach lay in its implicit unfusing ofjustification and criticism.
Involved here is not merely a paradigm shift in either of Kuhn's main senses, but
something farther reaching that I call a "metacontextual shift."'°'
(7.) A need for the rewriting of the history of science is immediately
crated-a problem-oriented historical program conforming to principles of
evolution and learning theory rather than to the principles, presuppositions,
and style of inductivism. Joseph Agassi charted the outlines of such a program
(1963).b02
in his Towards an Historiography of Science
(8.) A need for rewriting and restructuring the history of philosophy is
created. Seen anew from the perspective of a separation between justification
and criticism, the chief crises and turning points of the history of philosophy
undergo metamorphosis.
NOTES

in
0. Sections of Paris I and II of this essay have appeared, in preliminary draft,
"Em
'l laphilosophia shell Ilamada Bemabath LeHachor," in Machsha vol. Tel Aviv, 1979; and
schwierigcr Mcnsch: Eine POrträtskiZzC von Sir Karl Popper." in Physiognotnien: Philosophen
ed. Eckhard Nordhofen (KOnigstein: Athenäum Verlag,
des 20. Jahrhunderts in Portraits,
1980), pp. 43-69. I am grateful for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this essay from Avner
Walter Kaufmann, Paul Levinson, Peter
Cohen, Brian Gomes da Costa. Ian C. Jarvie. the late
Munz, Ben-Ami Scharfstein, and J.V.N. Watkins.
p. 7.
I. A. J. Ayer, The Problem of Knowledge (Edinburgh: Penguin Books, 1956),Scientific
The Logic of
2. Karl P.. Popper, "Preface to the English Edition, 1958,"
Discovery (London: Ilutchinson, 1959), pp. 15-16.
Collected Papers V (Cambridge,
3. Charles S. Peirce, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear," in
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1934), p.252. The essay was first published inPopularScience
Monthh' in 1878.
4. Popper, Unended Quest (London: Fontana, 1976), p. 40.

284

IN PURSUIT OF TR UT/i

5. \V. J. Gardner, E. T. Beardsley, and T. E. Carter, A FUsion' oft/u' Unirersiiv of
Canterbur', 1873-1973 (Christchurch: University of Canterbury, 1973). p. 308.
6. Ibid., pp. 262-263.
7. See Greg Lawless, ed., The harvard Crimson Anthology (New York: lloughton
Mitilin, 1980).
8. Popper, Objective Knowledge (London: Oxford University Press, 1972), p. 32. (Popper
attributes the last line to R. Hochhuth.) See also Bryan Magee, Modern British Philosoph;' (New
York: St. Martin's Press, 1971), pp. 66ff
9. See \V. W. Bartley, III, "Theory of Language and Philosophy of Science as lnstrunsents
of Educational Reform: \Vittgenstein and Popper as Austrian Schoolteachers," Ft Methodological
and Historical Essays in the Natural and Social Sciences, ed. R. S. Cohen and NI. W.
Wartofsky (Boston: D. Reidel, 1974); Bartley, Ludit'ig JVittgensiein e Karl R. Popper: ,l!aesiri
discuola eletnentare (Rome: Armando Amiando, 1976); and Bartley, Jl'ittgt'nsiejn (New York:
J. B. Lippincott, 1973).
10. See Popper's correction to this mistake in the' Preface 1980'' to his Rca/is in aisil theA un
of Science, vol. 1 of the Postscript to t/te Logic ofScient(Jic Disco very, ed. W. \V. Bartley, Ill
(London: Hutchinson, in press).
II. See John T. Blackmore, Ernst Mach: His Jl'ork, LIe. and Influence (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1972); and Bartley, "Philosophy of Biology versus Philosophy of
Physics," in Fundainenta Scientiae 3 (1982) (forthcoming).
12. See Popper, "A Note on Berkeley as PrecursorofNfach and Einstein," in his Conjectures
and Refutations (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962), pp. 166-I 74; John Nlyltill.
"Berkeley's 'De Motu': An Anticipation of Mach," U,tiversitt' of Cahfor,iia Publications i,:
Phi/osopht' 29(1957): 141-157; and Gerard Hinrichs, "The Logical Positivism ofDe tIotu,"
Review of Metaphysics 3 (1950): 491-505.
13. See Bartley, "Logical Strength and Demarcation," in Rationality in Science and
Politics, ed. Gunnar Andersson (forthcoming).
14. On the anticipation of Hunte by Sextus Empiricus, see P.. 11. Popkin, The history of
Scepticism front Eras,nus to Spinoza (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979), and The
Ihg/z Road to Pyrrhonis,n (San Diego: Austin Hill Press, 1980).
15. See Bartley, "Goodman's Paradox: A Simple-Minded Solution," in Philosophical
Studies (December 1968): 85-88; "Theories of Dentarcation between Science and Metaphysics,"
in Problems in the Philosophy of Science, ed. I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (Amsterdam: North.
Holland, 1968), pp. 40-119; "Critical Study: The Philosophy of Karl Popper: Part Ill:
Rationality, Criticism, and Logic," Philosophia (1982); and "Eine Losung des Goodman.
Paradoxons," in Voraussetzungen mcd Grenzen c/er ll'issenschaft, ed. G. Radnitzky and G.
Andersson (Tdbingen: J. C. B. Nlohr [Paul Sk'beckj Verlag, 1981). See also Nelson Goodman,
Fact, Fiction and Forecast (Cambridge. Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1955; new edition,
1973), esp. pp. 74ff. See also \V. V. Quine, "On Popper's Negative Methodology," in The
Philosoph.i' of Karl Popper, ed. P. A. Schilpp (LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court, 1974), p. 220.
16. Reprinted in A. J. Ayer, ed., Logical Positivism (London: George Allen & Unwin,
1959), pp. 60-81.
17. See RudolfCarnap, "Preface to the First Edition," of The Logical Structure oft/it' ll'orld
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), p. xvii.
18. See Popper, The Logic of ScientfJlc Discoveri'; and C. G. Hempel. "Problems and
Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of Meaning," Revue Internationale de Philosophic (1950),
reprinted in Ayer, ed., Logical Positivism.
19. Kurt GOdel, "A Remark about the Relationship between Relativity Theory and Idealistic
Philosophy," in Albert Einstein: P/tilosopher-Scientist, ed. P. A. Schilpp (New York: I lamer
'l'orchbook, 1959).
20. Howard Stein, "On the Paradoxical Time-Structures of GOdel," Philosophy of Science
(December 1970): 589-601.
21, Eugene P. Wigner, Symmetries aitd Reflections (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University
Press, 1967), p. 186. See also Bartley, "Critical Study: The Philosophy of Karl Popper Part II:
Consciousness and Physics: Quantum Mechanics, Probability, Indetemcinisns, the Body-Mind
Problem," Pit ilosophtia 7 (1978): 676-716. See also Popper, Quantum Theory and i/ce Schism

A Popperiait hiarc'est

285

in l'ht'sics, vol. 3 of the Postscript to the Logic of ScientJ7c Discovery, ed. Bartley,
22. See my "Philosophy of Biology versus Philosophy of Physics."
23. Pierre Duhem, l'he Aim and Structure of Pht'sical Theory (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1914/1954).
24. Two such pseudo-paradoxes are Goodman's puzzle about the "grue" emeralds and
Lewis Carroll's Barber-Shop Paradox. See my discussions of Goodman, as cited in note 15,
above; and my discussion of Carroll in Bartle, Lect'is Carroll's Ss'inbolk Logic (New York:
Clarkson N. Potter, l977), pp. 444-449.
25. Sec Ernest Gellner. Words and Things (London: Gollancz, 1959).
26. 1 lilary Putnam, "The 'Corroboration' of Theories," in The Philosophy of Karl Popper,
ed. Sclcilpp, pp. 238-239. See my discussion ofa similar approach by Ayer in my The Retreat to
Contmitnient (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1962), and in my "Rationality versus the Theory of
Rationality," in The CriticalApproach, ed. NI. Bunge (New York: Free Press, 1964).
27. See also Popper's first book, finally published in 1979: Die beiden Grundprobleine der
Erke,,,ttnist/ct'orie (Tiihingen: J. C. 13. Mohr I Paul Siebecki Verlag, 1979), in which many of the
basic ideas of Logik der Forschung are given their first statement.
28. See Popper's extended discussions of induction in Objective Knoit'ledge, chaps. I and 2;
and in Realism and the Aim,, of Science, chap. I.
29. For a discussion of the psychological ramifications, and of work in psychology that refutes
the inductivist approach, see Valter B. Veimcr's discussion of Pribram's work on habituation, in
\Valter B. Weimer, "The Psychology of Inference and Expectation," in Induction, Probabilit;
and Co:lJ7rnwtion. ed. Grover Maxwell and R. M. Anderson, Jr. (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1975). p. 459. See also Weimer's Notes on the Methodology of Scientific
Research (Hillsdale. N.J.: Erlbaum IJohn Wileyj, 1979), and his "The History of Psychology
and Its Retrieval from Historiography," Parts! and II, in Science Studies 4(1974): 235-258 and
367 -396.
30. Falsifying observations are also theory-incpregnated and thus also falsifiable, See
Popper. Logic of ScientfJic Discoc'er,i', sec. 27, and Gunnar Andersson's essay in the present
volume.
31. See my criticisms of Popper on corroboration in "Rationality, Criticism, and Logic."
32. See Camap, "Preface," p. xvii.
33. Although Popper's criticisms of Freudian theory are on the whole sound, (hey are too
extreme. Adolf GrUnbaum has gone to the other extreme in his "Is Freudian Psychoanalytic
Theory Pseudo-Scientific by Karl Popper's Criterion of Demarcation?" American Philosophical
Quarter/c' 16 (1979): 131-141. See Popper's extended discussion of Freud in Realism and she
Aim of Science.
34. Sec J.\V.N. Watkins, "Confirniable and Influential Metaphysics," Mind (1958): 345347: and Popper. Logic of Scient j,/lc Disco very, sec. IS, and Conjectures and Refutations, chap.
35. See Popper. Unended Quest, p. 38.
36. See nty The Retreat to Com,'nitncent, pp. 156-175; and "Rationality, Criticism, and
Logic."
37. Sec my"Critical Study: The Philosophy of Karl Popper Part I: Biology and Evolutionary
Epistemology," Philosophia 6 (1976): 463-494.
38. See Popper, The Opesi Universe: An Argument for Indeterminism. vol. 2 of the
Postscript to the Logic of Scientific Disco cer,i', ed. Bartley.
39. Ibid.
40. Sec Popper's Quantum Theory and the Schism in Physics; see also Bartley,
"Consciousness and Physics"; and Jim Edwards. "Hidden Variables and tlte Propensity Theory
of Probability," British Journal for the Philosoph,t' of Science 30 (1979): 315-328.
41. See Blacknsore. Ernst 4%Iach; and Bartley, "Philosophy of Biology versus Philosophy of
Physics."
42. Popper, in The Philosoph.t' of Karl Popper, ed. Schilpp, p. 1061; see also Barilcy,
"Biology and Evolutionary Epistemology."
43. See Donald T. Campbell, "Blind Variation and Selective Retention in Creative Thought
as in Other Knowledge Processes," Ps,t'chological Rec'ieit' 67 (1960): 380-400.

44. See his Unended Quest.
45. Popper. "On the Possibility of an Infinite Past: A Reply to Whitrow' l3ritish Journal for
the Philosophy of Science 29 (1978): 47-48; Popper, Unended Quest, secs. 28, 30, 35-36.
46. See Bartley, "Rationality, Criticism, and Logic." See also Gunnar Andersson, "The
Problem of Verisimilitude," in Progress and Rationalit:' in Science. ed. Gerard Radnitzky and
Gunnar Andersson (l3oston: Reidel, 1978). pp.291-31 0, and the bibliographical references eitd
there. See also Joseph Agassi, "The Role of Corroboration," A ust rn/asian Journal ofPhilosophs'
39 (1961): 82-91; and Popper's Objective Knott/edge, rev. ed., app. 2, on Miller's paradox.
47. Times Literary Supplement, February 27, 1959. p. H 177.
48. See my discussion of Ayer and White in The Retreat to Com,nitasent.
49. George S. Pappas, ed., Justification and Knott/edge (Boston: Reidel, 1979), p. xv.
50. See my The Retreat to Commitment; "Rationality versus the Theory of Rationality"; and
"Rationality, Criticism, and Logic."
51. N.M.L. Nathan, Evidence andAssurance (London: Cambridge University Press. 1980).
52. Stephen P. Stich and Richard E. Nisbett, "Justification and Psychology of Human
Reasoning," P/iilosop/tt' of Scie,tce 47(1980): 188-202.
53. Jean-Paul Sartre, Saint Genet:Actorand ?tlartvr(New York: George l3raziller, 1963). p.
24.
54. 1-larold 1. Brown, Percepdon, Theort' and Co,n,nit,nent: The Neu' Philosophr ofSciencc
(Chicago: Precedent, 1977).
55. See Campbell, "Descriptive Epistemology: Psychological. Sociological, and Evolutionary,"
mimeographed (William James Lectures, Harvard University, 1977). See also Campbell. "A
Tribal Model of the Social System Vehicle Carrying Scientific Knowledge," in Knowledge:
Creation, Diffusion, Utilization I (1979): 181-201. Incidentally, one unremarked unintended
consequence of the current sociology of knowledge is almost certain to retard the growtls of
knowledge. Namely, some professionals will take advantage of their knowledge of the sociology
and psychology of academic communities in order to manipulate them to their own advantage and
thereby to perpetuate themselves at the expense of the growth of knowledge.
56. See, for example, Georg LQhrs, Thilo Sarrazin, Frithjof Spreer. and Nfanfrt'd Tiezel,
eds., Kritischer Rationalismnus umici Sozialde,nokratie, with Foreword by I lelmut Schmidt
(Berlin: J. H. \V. Dietz Verlag. 1975); or T. \V. Adorno, II. Albert, R. Dahreisdort', .1.
Habermas, H. Pilot, and K. R. Popper, 7'he Positivist Dispute in German Sociology
(London: Heinemann, 1976).
57. The winners of the Sonning Prize are: \Vinston Churchill, 1950: Albert Schweitzer,
1959; Bertrand Russell, 1960; Niels Bohr, 1961; Alvar Aalto, 1962: Karl Barth, 1963:
Dominique Pire, 1964; Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, 1965: Sir Laurence Olivier, 1966: W.
A. Visser't Hooft, 1967; Arthur Koestler, 1968; Halldor Laxness, 1969: Max Tau, 1970; Danilo
Dolci, 1971; Sir Karl Popper, 1973; Hannah Arendt, 1975: Arne Naess, 1977: Hern:ann
Gmeiner, 1979. A Sonning Music Prize is also awarded annually, whose recipients include
Leonard Bernstein, Andrés Segovia, and Mstislav Rostropovitch.
58. See Konrad Lorenz, Behind the Mirror: A Search for a Natural Ilistor:' of human
Knott/edge (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977): and Alec Nisbett, Konrud Lore,,::
Biogropht' (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976). See also Campbell: "Reintroducing
Konrad Lorenz to Psychology," in Richard I. Evans, Konrad Lorenz: The ,tma,, and I/is ideas
(New York: Harcours Brace Joranovich, 1975).
59. Times Higher Education Supplement, July 14, 1978. p. Il; August 4, 1978, p. 10:
September 1, 1978, p. II.
60. Gellner, The Devil in Modern Philosophy (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974), pp.
37-38.
61. See Gellner, "The LSE-a Contested Academy," in Times Higher Educatiom,
Supplement, November 7, 1980, pp. 12-13; and Peter Scott, in 'i'imcs IlitJ,s'r Educatiom,
Supplement, November 16, 1979, p. 18.
62. See Ayer, Part ofift' Ltfe (London: Oxford University Press, 1977); and Ayer, "The
Currents ofan Independent Ayer," Tunes Higher Education Supplement, January 23, 1981. pp.
9-10.
63. See LUhrs et a)., Kritischer Rationalismnus; Adorno et al. Positivist Dispute; and the
works of Hans Albert.
64. See Popper, in K. R. Popper and J. C. Eccles, The Se/fond its Brain (New York:

Springer Verlag, 1977), sec. 42: "The Self Anchored in \Vorld 3."
65. See Campbell, "Evolutionary Epistemology," in The Philosophy of Karl Popper, ed.
Schilpp, pp. 413-463.
66. Sec Paul K. Feyerabend, Against Method (London: NLB, 1975); Science in a Free
Society (London: NLI3. 1978); Knowledge without Foundations (Oberlin, Ohio: Oberlin
College, 1961); and Realism, Rationalism and Scientific Method and Problems of Empiricism,
vols. I and 2 of his Philosophical Papers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981).
67, See my The Retreat to Commitment; "Rationality, Criticism, and I..ogic"; and
"Rationality versus the Theory of Rationality."
68, See Imrc Lakatos, Proofs and Refuthtions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1976); The Methodology of Scien: j/ic Resea,rh Programmes (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1978); and Mathematics, Science and Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1978). See also my "On lmre Lakatos," in Essays in Metnoty of Imre Lakatos, ed. R. S.
Cohen, P. K. Fcyerabend, and M, V. Wartofsky (Boston: D. Reidel, 1976), pp. 37-38.
69, See \Vcimer, Notes on the Methodology of Scientific Research, p. xi.
70. This is not surprising. Phases one and three are always at war with one another' to the
extent that the Popperians succeed in phase one, they are likely to have trouble with phase three,
See Campbell, "Descriptive Epistemology," and "A Tribal Model."
71. See D. L. Krantz and Lynda Wiggins, "Personal and Impersonal Channels of
Recruitment in the Growth of Theory," Human Development 16(1973): 133.
72. See Melvin Seeman, "Intellectual Perspective and Adjustment to Minority Status,"
Social Problems 3 (1956): 142-153.
73. Just a few examples from Popper himself: The Open Society was rejected for publication
by twenty different publishers and their philosophical advisers before Ernst Gombrich, the art
historian, and F. A. von Hayck, the Nobel prizewinning economist, convinced Routledgc &
Kegan Paul to publish it. Twenty years after its publication, Sir Isaiah Berlin still called it "the
most scrupulous and fonnidable criticism of Marx by any living writer." The Poverty of
Ilistoricism, Popper's other critique of Marxism and the social sciences, which Arthur Koestler
described as "one of the few books that would outlive this century," was turned down for
publication in Mind by C. E. Moore.
74. Perhaps this may work to the advantage of Popper's ideas. Compare Allen Wheelis, The
Quest for Identity (New York: Norton, 1958), pp. 153-154:
Freud's work was quickly institutionalized, and thereafter was defended and
promoted as a vested interest. , . . Marx, like Freud, used his work as the capital
endowment of a social movement,... Darwin, in contrast, did not retain possession
of his work, Battles were fought over the issues he raised, but his defenders were
volunteers. No one was enlisted, and no one was compelled to follow a party line.
There were no membership cards, no International Evolutionary Association. No
one was prevented from furthering Darwin's work because of altering his theory.
The discovery was attacked by institutions, but did not become institutionalized in
defense. It was besieged by vested interests, but did not itself become a vested
interest. Yet it survived, and has since participated widely in the ongoing process of
science,
75. See David L. Krantz, "The Separate Worlds of Operant and Non-Operant Psychology,"
Journal of Applied Behai'iorAnal,t'sis 4 (1971): 6 1-70.
76. See David Riesman, Individualism Reconsidered (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1954), p.
163.
77. See Robert E. Park, "Human Migration and the Marginal Man," The American
Journal of Sociolog,i' (May 1928): 881-893.
78, I use thc terns "research program" in the sense given by Popper in the "Metaphysical
Epilogue" to his Postscript to the Logic ofScienz(fic Discovery, vol. 3, Quantum Theory and the
Schism in Ph,,'sics, This idea was popularized, and given a somewhat different sense, by the late
Imrc Lakatos, for which see his The Methodology of Scientjfic Research Programnmes, and my
"On lmre Lakatos."
79. Sec my Rationality, Criticism, and Logic"; "Rationality versus the Theory mof
Rationality": and The Retreat to Commitment,

80. See Popper, Unended Quest: Bartley, "Theory of Language and Philosophy of Science as
lnst-uments of Educational Reform"; Bartley, Witzgenstt'in; and Bartley. "Em schwieriger
Mensch."
SI. Ludwig \Vittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1922). See my JYitigenstein, pp. 48-Si; and James Griflin, JVittgenstein's Logical
Atomis,n (Seattle: University of \Vashington Press, 1964).
82. Bertrand Russell, Jtfy Philosophical Development (London: George Allen & Unwin,
1959), p. 159.
83. See Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (London: Williams and Norgate, 1912); and
Bartley, "Logical Strength and Demarcation."
84. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical In vesdgaiions (Oxford: Blackwell, 1953), paras. 481,
486.
85. See Hilary Putnam's remark, quoted in Section IS, above.
86. See Putnam, "The 'Corroboration' of Theories."
87. Wittgenstein, On Certainty (Oxford: Blackwell, 1969), para. 110.
88. Many of the debates of the past four decades can be understood only in terms of this step.
Take the "covering law debate," for instance. This debate-one ofthe most intense in professional
philosophy during the I 950s and early 1 960s-concemed the question whether Popper's model of
scientilic explanation (widely referred to as the "Popper-Hempel model" or as the "covering law
model") could be applied, as both Popper and Hempel had maintained, to explanation in history
writing, just as it was applied to explanation in physics and other sciences. This debate was
peculiar for several reasons: (a) because of the large number of philosophers independently
attracted to it; (b) because it was a pseudo-debate, depending almost entirely on misreadings of
what Popper and Hempel had actually said, and on a string ofnon-sequiturs (see my "Achilles, the
Tortoise, and Explanation in Science and in History," Britis/t Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 13 [19621: 15-33; and app. C ofmy Lewis Carroll's Symbolic Logic, pp. 466-470); and
(c) because the issues were intrinsically unimportant: what Popper says is trivially correct-and
rather unenlightening with regard to historical explanation. This debate can be understood only
within the wider context of the Wistgensteinian problematic. liii is assumed that standards of
inference must be field dependent and not universal, then any important standard-setting feature of
investigative activity in any area-and certainly so important a feature as explanation-that
purported to be universal, applying to all fields, and not field dependent, would pose a threat and a
challenge, Hence the debate over the covering law model is in reality an attempt to show (an
attempt contemptuous of the facts and of what was in fact written) that explanation ,ztust be field
dependent too. What is really involved is the uncritical rejection of the contention that a model for
scientific explanation could apply in an area that was nonscientific and that thus "ofcourse" had a
different "logic." Consequently, this debate produced no serious investigations of historical
narrative, only disguised and misplaced polemics against what was conceived as scientific
imperialism.
89. \Vittgenstein, Philosophical Inrestigations. para. 109.
90. This is "research" only in a quixotic sense. True research, advancing knowledge, does
more than grindingly apply a central theme to various different areas.
91. See my JVittgenstein, pp. 167-170.
92. See my The Retreat to Commitment, pp. 124-133.
93. See Campbell, "Descriptive Epistemology," and "A Tribal Model."
94, See The Logic of Scienttjic Discovers', for extended treatments by Popper of the problem
of induction in its various aspects; see also his Objective Knott'ledge, chap. I ,and Realism andthe
Aim of Science, chap, I, esp. secs. 4-7.
95. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure ofScientj.flc Revolutions, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1970), "Postscript-1969," pp. 175ff.
96. See my "Logical Strength and Demarcation."
97. On the fusion and possibility ofseparatingjustification and criticism, see my The Retreat
to Com,nitment; "Rationality versus the Theory of Rationality": and "Rationality, Criticism, and
Logic."
98. See Popper, The Open Universe.
99. See my "Theory of Language and Philosophy of Science as Instruments of Educational

Reform." [See also Perkinson's essay in the present volume, and his note 2, for references to his
recent work in this area-Ed.[
100. See my The Retreat to Commitment; "Rationality versus the Theory of Rationality"; and
"Rationality, Criticism, and Logic."
101. See my "Rationality, Criticism, and Logicc" sec. 4.
102. Agassi. Towards an Ilis:oriogrophj' of Science (The Hague: Mouton & Co., 1963).

