ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I - THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

1. The relation between empirical observation and theoretical explanation
2. The use of statistics in the verification of theory
3. The task of statistics is to give accurate information
about events which fall within the province of theory
4. The main division in Trade Cycle theory is the division
between monetary and non-monetary theories
5. The purpose of the following essay
CHAPTER II - NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF THE TRADE CYCLE

1. A general refutation of such theories is difficult on
account of the absence of an adequate classification
2. The selection of subject matter for the present enquiry
3. Theories which explain the Cycle in terms of the
technical conditions of production
4. These all overlook the essential function of the mechanism of relative prices
5. The way in which prices react to such changes in
'data' as are assumed in these theories further examined
6. Theories which explain fluctuations with reference to
phenomena arising out of the process of saving and
investment
7. Psychological theories
8. All these theories assume the variability of credit
9. The main difference between monetary and other
changes in economic 'data'
10. The existence of monetary disturbances having been
assumed, the first task of theory is to examine all the
deviations from the system contemplated by the pure
theory of equilibrium which must necessarily follow
from this assumption
12

ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER III - MONETARY THEORIES OF THE TRADE CYCLE

1. The main tasks of a monetary theory of the Trade
Cycle
2. Monetary explanations should not proceed from changes
in the general level of prices
3. The essential point is the effect on the structure of
production of changes in the volume of money
4. Such changes in the structure of production are fundamentally independent of changes in the value of money
5. Most criticisms of the monetary explanation are due
to a misunderstanding of this point
6. Changes in individual price relationships must be the
main focus of attention, for such changes cause shifts
in the direction of production
7. Phenomena (such as deviations between the natural
and the money rates of interest) which are fundamentally independent of changes in the value of
money
8. Advantages of the proposed method of approach; the
possibility of a rapprochement between monetary and
non-monetary theories

CHAPTER I V - T H E FUNDAMENTAL
TUATIONS

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUC-

1. The problem is to discover why certain changes in
'data' are able to lead the system away from equilibrium
2. Exogenous and endogenous monetary theories
3. Of three possible ways of increasing the volume of
money, the most important, from the present point of
view, is the creation of credit by the banks
4. Confusion on this point is due largely to a failure to
distinguish between the possibilities open to a single
bank and those open to the banking system as a whole
5. The actual origin of additional credits

ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS
6. The possibility of bankers arbitrarily creating credits
is ruled out because, in individual cases, it is impossible
to distinguish between those deposits which arose
through cash payments and those which find their
origin in credit
7. The reaction of the banks to an increased demand for
credit
8. The process of credit expansion and its cessation
9. Elasticity in the volume of circulating media is a sufficient cause of cyclical fluctuation
10. The significance of these monetary influences from the
point of view of Trade Cycle theory
n . Their bearing on policy

CHAPTER V - UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF TRADE CYCLE THEORY

1. All variations in the volume of effective circulation
necessarily involve movements other than those which
can be immediately deduced from the propositions of
static theory
2. The most important effects are via movements in the
structure of the money rates of interest - which thus
present a series of important problems
3. The significance of fluctuations in the natural rate of
interest
4. The concept of a natural or equilibrium rate of interest
5. The relation between the equilibrium rate and the
actual (money) rate of interest
6. Forced saving as a cause of economic crises
7. Interest rates in the money and capital markets respectively
8. Problems for statistical investigation

PREFACE
THE German essay*, of which the following is a
translation, represents an expanded version of a
paper]* prepared for the meeting of the Verein
fiir Sozialpolitik,% held in Zurich in September
1928, and of some remarks contributed to the
discussion at that meeting. Although, in revising
the translation, I have made numerous minor
alterations and additions (mainly confined to the
footnotes), the general course of the argument has
been left unchanged. The book, therefore, still
shows signs of the particular aim with which it
was written. In submitting it to a public different
from that for which it was originally intended, a
few words of explanation are, perhaps, required.
* Geldtheorie

und Konjunkturtheorie (Beitrage zur Konjunktur-

forschung, herausgegeben vom Osterreichisches Institut fiir Konjunkturforschung, No. 1). Vienna 1929.
t Einige Bemerkungen tiber das Verhdltnis der Geldtheorie

zur

Konjunkturtheorie in vol. 173, part 2 of the 'Schriften des Vereins
fur Sozialpolitik,* Miinchen 1928.
% Schriften des Vtreins fiir Sozialpolitik,

Miinchen 1928.

vol. 175, pp.

369-374,

PREFACE

In Germany, somewhat in contrast to the
situation in English-speaking countries, monetary
explanations of the Trade Cycle were always, or at
least until quite recently, regarded with some
mistrust. One of the aims of this study — one
on which an English reader may feel that I have
wasted unnecessary energy — was to justify the
monetary approach to these problems. But I hope
that this more explicit statement of the role of the
monetary factor will not be found quite useless,
for it is not only a justification of the monetary
approach but also a refutation of some oversimplified monetary explanations which are widely
accepted. In order to save the sound elements
in the monetary theories of the Trade Cycle, I had
to attempt, in particular, to refute certain theories
which have led to the belief that, by stabilizing
the general price level, all the disturbing monetary
causes would be eliminated. Although, since this
book was written, this belief has been somewhat
rudely shaken by the crisis of 1929, I hope that a
systematic examination of its foundations will still
be found useful. The critique of the programme
of the Stabilizers', which is in many ways the
16

PREFACE

central theme of this book, has now occupied
me for many years, and since I deal here only
with some special problems which have grown
mainly out of these studies, I may perhaps be
permitted to refer below to other publications, in which I have partly dealt with
certain further theoretical problems and partly
attempted to use these considerations for the
elucidation of contemporary phenomena.* In
particular, my Prices and Production, originally
published in England, should be considered as
an essential complement to the present publication.
While I have here emphasized the monetary
causes which start the cyclical fluctuations, I
have, in that later publication, concentrated on the
successive changes in the real structure of production,

which constitute those fluctuations. This essential
complement of my theory seems to me to be the
• Die Wdhrungspolitik der Vereinigten Staaten seit der Uberwindung
der Krise von 1920, Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtschaft und Sozialpolitik,
N.F., vol. v, 1925. Das intertemporale Gleichgezvichtssystem der
Preise und die Bewegungen des Geldwertes, 'Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv,' vol. 28, 1928, The 'Paradox' of Saving, 'Economica' No. 32,
May 1931. Prices and Production, London, 1931. Reflections on the
Pure Theory of Money of Mr. J. M. Keynes, 'Economica' Nos. 33-35,
1931-32. Das Schicksal der Goldwdhrung, Der Deutsche Volkswirt,
1932. Kapitalaufzehrung, 'Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv/ vol. 36,1932.
B
17

PREFACE
more important since, in consequence of actual
economic developments, the over-simplified monetary explanations have gained undeserved prominence in recent times. And since, in all my
English publications, I have purposely refrained
from combining purely theoretical considerations
with discussions of current events, it may be useful
to add here one or two remarks on the bearing
of those considerations on the problems of
to-day.
It is a curious fact that the general disinclination
to explain the past boom by monetary factors
has been quickly replaced by an even greater
readiness to hold the present working of our
monetary organization exclusively responsible for
our present plight. And the same stabilizers who
believed that nothing was wrong with the boom
and that it might last indefinitely because prices
did not rise, now believe that everything could be
set right again if only we would use the weapons
of monetary policy to prevent prices from falling.
The same superficial view which sees no other
harmful effect of a credit expansion but the rise
of the price level, now believes that our only
18

PREFACE

difficulty is a fall in the price level, caused by
credit contraction.
There can, of course, be little doubt that, at
the present time, a deflationary process is going
on and that an indefinite continuation of that
deflation would do inestimable harm. But this
does not, by any means, necessarily mean that the
deflation is the original cause of our difficulties
or that we could overcome these difficulties by
compensating for the deflationary tendencies, at
present operative in our economic system, by
forcing more money into circulation. There
is no reason to assume that the crisis was started
by a deliberate deflationary action on the part of
the monetary authorities, or that the deflation
itself is anything but a secondary phenomenon,
a process induced by the maladjustments of
industry left over from the boom. If, however,
the deflation is not a cause but an effect of the
unprofitableness of industry, then it is surely vain
to hope that, by reversing the deflationary process,
we can regain lasting prosperity. Far from following a deflationary policy, Central Banks, particularly
in the United States, have been making earlier

PREFACE
and more far-reaching efforts than have ever
been undertaken before to combat the depression
by a policy of credit expansion — with the result
that the depression has lasted longer and has
become more severe than any preceding one.
What we need is a readjustment of those elements
in the structure of production and of prices
which existed before the deflation began and
which then made it unprofitable for industry
to borrow. But, instead of furthering the inevitable liquidation of the maladjustments brought
about by the boom during the last three years, all
conceivable means have been used to prevent
that readjustment from taking place; and one of
these means, which has been repeatedly tried
though without success, from the earliest to the
most recent stages of depression, has been this
deliberate policy of credit expansion.
It is very probable that the much discussed
rigidities, which had already grown up in many
parts of the modern economic system before
1929, would, in any case, have made the process
of readjustment much slower and more painful.
It is also probable that these very resistances to
20

PREFACE

readjustment would have set up a severe deflationary process which would finally have overcome
those rigidities. To what extent, under the given
situation of a relatively rigid price and wage
system, this deflationary process is perhaps not
only inevitable but is even the quickest way of
bringing about the required result, is a very
difficult question, about which, on the basis of
our present knowledge, I should be afraid to make
any definite pronouncement.
It seems certain, however, that we shall merely
make matters worse if we aim at curing the
deflationary symptoms and, at the same time (by
the erection of trade barriers and other forms of
state intervention) do our best to increase rather
than to decrease the fundamental maladjustments.
More than that: while the advantages of such a
course are, to say the least, uncertain, the new
dangers which it creates are great. To combat the
depression by a forced credit expansion is to
attempt to cure the evil by the very means which
brought it about; because we are suffering from
a misdirection of production, we want to create
further misdirection — a procedure which can only
21

PREFACE

lead to a much more severe crisis as soon as the
credit expansion comes to an end. It would not be
the first experiment of this kind which has been
made. We should merely be repeating, on a much
larger scale, the course followed by the Federal
Reserve system in 1927, an experiment which
Mr. A. C. Miller, the only economist on the Federal
Reserve Board and, at the same time, its oldest
member, has rightly characterized as 'the greatest
and boldest operation ever undertaken by the Federal reserve system', an operation which 'resulted
in one of the most costly errors committed by it
or any other banking system in the last 75 years\
It is probably to this experiment, together with
the attempts to prevent liquidation once the crisis
had come, that we owe the exceptional severity
and duration of the depression. We must not
forget that, for the last six or eight years, monetary
policy all over the world has followed the advice
of the stabilizers. It is high time that their influence, which has already done harm enough, should
be overthrown.
We cannot hope for the overthrow of this
alluringly simple theory until its theoretical basis
22

PREFACE
is definitely refuted and something better substituted for it. The opponents of the stabilization
programme still labour — and probably always
will labour — under the disadvantage that they
have no equally simple and clear-cut rule to
propose; perhaps no rule at all which will satisfy
the eagerness of those who hope to cure all evils
by authoritative action. But whatever may be our
hope for the future, the one thing of which we must
be painfully aware at the present time —a fact
which no writer on these problems should fail to
impress upon his readers — is how little we really
know of the forces which we are trying to influence
by deliberate management; so little indeed that it
must remain an open question whether we would
try if we knew more.
FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK

The London School of Economics
June 1932

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE
CYCLE

CHAPTER

I

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE
CYCLE
i

ANY attempt either to forecast the trend of
economic development, or to influence it by
measures based on an examination of existing
conditions, must presuppose certain quite definite
conceptions as to the necessary course of economic
phenomena. Empirical studies, whether they are
undertaken with such practical aims in view, or
whether they are confined merely to the amplification, with the aid of special statistical devices, of
our knowledge of the course of particular phases
of trade fluctuations, can, at best, afford merely a
verification of existing theories; they cannot, in
themselves, provide new insight into the causes
or the necessity of the Trade Cycle.
This view has been stated very forcibly by
Professor A. L6we. #
* In his essay: Wie ist Konjunkturtheorie uberhaupt mcglich? Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, vol. 24. 1926 part 2, p. 166.
27

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
'Our insight into the theoretical interconnections
of economic cycles, and into the structural laws of
circulation', he says, 'has not been enriched at all
by descriptive work or calculations of correlations.'
We can entirely agree with him, moreover, when
he goes on to say that 'to expect an immediate
furtherance of theory from an increase in empirical
insight is to misunderstand the logical relationship
between theory and empirical research'.
The reason for this is clear. The means of
perception employed in statistics are not the same
as those employed in economic theory; and it is
therefore impossible to fit regularities established
by the former into the structure of economic laws
prescribed by the latter. We cannot superimpose
upon the system of fundamental propositions
comprised in the theory of equilibrium, a Trade
Cycle theory resting on unrelated logical foundations. All the phenomena observed in cyclical
fluctuations, particularly price formation and its
influence on the direction and the volume of
production, have already been explained by the
theory of equilibrium; they can only be integrated
as an explanation of the totality of economic
28

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE
events by means of fundamentally similar constructions. Trade Cycle theory itself is only
expected to explain how certain prices are determined, and to state their influence on production
and consumption; and the determining conditions
of these phenomena are already given by
elementary theory. Its special task arises from
the fact that these phenomena show empirically
observed movements for the explanation of which
the methods of equilibrium theory are as yet
inadequate. One need not go so far as to say that
a successful solution could be reached only in
conjunction with a positive explanation of
elementary phenomena; but no further proof is
needed that such a solution can only be achieved
in association with, or by means of, a theory
which explains how certain prices or certain
uses of given goods are determined at all. It is
not only that we lack theories which fulfil this
condition and which fall outside the category
best described as 'equilibrium theories' * —
*Cf. Lowe: Der gegenwdrtige Stand der Konjunkiurtheorie

inDeutsch-

land, Die Wirtschaftswissenschaft nach dem Kriege, Festgabe fur
Lujo Brentano zum 80. Geburtstag, vol. ii, p. 360.
29

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

theories which are characterized by taking the
logic of economic action as their starting point;
the point is rather that statistical method is
fundamentally unsuited to this purpose. Just as
no statistical investigation can prove that a given
change in demand must necessarily be followed by
a certain change in price, so no statistical method
can explain why all economic phenomena present
that regular wave-like appearance which we
observe in cyclical fluctuations. This can be
explained only by widening the assumptions on
which our deductions are is based, so that cyclical
fluctuations would follow from these as a necessary
consequence, just as the general propositions of
the theory of price followed from the narrower
assumptions of equilibrium theory.
But even these new assumptions cannot be
established by statistical investigation. The statistical approach, unlike deductive inference, leaves
the conditions under which established economic
relations hold good fundamentally undetermined;
and similarly, the objects to which they relate
cannot be determined as unequivocally as by
theory. Empirically established relations between
3°

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

various economic phenomena continue to present
a problem to theory until the necessity for their
interconnections can be demonstrated independently of any statistical evidence.* The concepts
on which such an explanation is based will
be quite different from those by which statistical
interconnections are demonstrated; they can
be reached independently.
Moreover, the
corroboration of statistical evidence provides,
in itself, no proof of correctness. A priori we
cannot expect from statistics anything more than
the stimulus provided by the indication of new
problems.
In thus emphasizing the fact that Trade Cycle
theory, while it may serve as a basis for statistical
• Cf. the excellent analysis given by E. Altschul in his well-known
essay Konjunkturtheorie und Konjunkturstatistik

(Archiv fur Sozial-

wissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, vol. 55, Tubingen, 1926). Altschul
as a statistician deserves especial credit when, recognizing the
limitations of statistical methods, he writes (p. 85) 'In economics
especially, the final decision about the significance of a certain
phenomenon can never be left to mathematical and statistical analysis.
The main approach to research must necessarily lie through theoretically obtained knowledge.' Cf. also A. C. Pigou, Industrial Fluctuations, 2nd ed. (London, 1929) p. 37, 'The absence of statistical correlation between a given series of changes and industrial fluctuations
does not by itself disprove - and its presence does not prove - that
these changes are causes of the fluctuations.'

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
research, can never itself be established by the
latter, it is by no means desired to deprecate the
value of the empirical method. On the contrary,
there can be no doubt that Trade Cycle theory
can only gain full practical importance through
exact measurement of the actual course of the
phenomena which it describes. But before we
can examine the question of the true importance
of statistics to theory, it must be clearly recognized
that the use of statistics can never consist in a
deepening of our theoretical insight.

11

Even as a means of verification, the statistical
examination of the cycles has only a very limited
value for Trade Cycle theory. For the latter —
as for any other economic theory — there are only
two criteria of correctness. Firstly, it must be
deduced with unexceptionable logic from the fundamental notions of the theoretical system; and
secondly, it must explain by a purely deductive
method those phenomena with all their peculiar32

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

ities which we observe in the actual cycles.* Such
a theory could only be 'false' either through an
inadequacy in its logic or because the phenomena
which it explains do not correspond with the
observed facts. If, however, the theory is logically
sound, and if it leads to an explanation of the given
phenomena as a necessary consequence of these
general conditions of economic activity, then the
best that statistical investigation can do is to show
that there still remains an unexplained residue of
processes. It could never prove that the determining relationships are of a different character
from those maintained by the theory.f
It might be shown, for instance, by statistical
investigation that a general rise in prices is followed
• Professor A. Lowe, in his report Uber den Einfluss monetarer
Faktoren auf den Konjunkturzyklus Schriften des Vereins fur Sozialpolitik, (vol. 173, part 2, p. 357) expresses his views in almost the
same words. The above sentences first appeared in another article
in the same volume.
f Cf. the analysis concerning 'Argument der Wirklichkeitswidrigkeit' in the recent book of E. Carell, Sozialokonomische Theorie
und Konjunkturproblem\ Munchen and Leipzig, 1929, for a very
acute methodological argument. He opposes the thesis of L6we (which
remains, however, despite his analysis, the basis of my own work)
that the incorporation of cyclical phenomena into the system of
economic equilibrium theory, with which they are in apparent
contradiction, remains the crucial problem of Trade Cycle theory.

c

33

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
by an expansion of production, and a general fall in
prices by a diminution of production; but this
would not necessarily mean that theory should
regard the movement of price as an independent
cause of movements of production. So long as a
theory could explain the regular occurrence of
this parallelism in any other way, it could not be
disproved by statistics, even if it maintained
that the connection between the two phenomena
was of a precisely opposite nature.* It is
therefore only in a negative sense that it is
possible to verify theory by statistics. Either statistics can demonstrate that there are phenomena
which the theory does not sufficiently explain,
or it is unable to discover such phenomena. It
cannot be expected to confirm the theory in a
positive sense. The possibility is completely ruled
out by what has been said above, since it would
presuppose an assertion of necessary interconnec• A well-known instance of such an apparent contradiction between
a correct theoretical assertion and experience is the connection
between the level of interest rates and the movement of prices. Cf.
Wicksell, Vorlesungen, vol. ii, 'Geld und Kredit,' Jena 1922. See also
my essay, 'Das intertemporale Gleichgettnchts-svstem der Preise
und die Bewegungen des Geldtveries, (Weltwirtschaftiches Archiv>
vol. 28 Jena 1928, p. 63 et seq.).

34

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

tions, such as statistics cannot make. There is no
reason to be surprised, therefore, that although
nearly all modern Trade Cycle theories use statistical material as corroboration, it is only where a
given theory fails to explain all the observed
phenomena that this statistical evidence can be
used to judge its merits.

Ill

Thus it is not by enriching or by checking theoretical analysis that economic statistics gain their
real importance. This lies elsewhere. The proper
task of statistics is to give us accurate information
about the events which fall within the province
of theory, and so to enable us not only to connect
two consecutive events as cause and effect, a posteriori, but to grasp existing conditions completely
enough for forecasts of the future and, eventually,
appropriate action, to become possible. It is
only through this possibility of forecasts of systematic action that theory gains practical impor35

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

tance.* A theory might, for instance, enable us to
infer from the comparative movements of certain
prices and quantities an imminent change in the
direction of those movements: but we should have
little use for such a theory if we were unable to
ascertain the actual movements of the phenomena
in question. With regard to certain phenomena
• It should be noted that the idea of forecasting is by no means a
new one, although it is often regarded as such. Every economic
theory, and indeed all theory of whatever sort, aims exclusively at
foretelling the necessary consequences of a given situation, event or
measure. The subject-matter of trade cycle theory being what it is,
it follows that ideally it should result in a collective forecast showing
the total development resulting from a given situation under given
conditions. In practice, such forecasts are attempted in too unconditional a form, and on an inadmissibly over-simplified basis; and,
consequently, the very possibility of scientific judgments about future
economic trends to-day appears problematical, and cautious thinkers
are apt to disparage any attempt at such forecasting. In contrast to
this view, we have to emphasize very strongly that statistical research
in this field is meaningless except in so far as it leads to a forecast,
however much that forecast may have to be hedged about with
qualifications. In particular any measures aimed at alleviating the
Trade Cycle (and necessarily based on statistical research) must be
conceived in the light of certain assumptions as to the future trend to
be expected in the absence of such measures. Statistical research,
therefore, serves only to furnish the bases for the utilization of existing
theoretical principles. Dr. O. Morgenstern's recent categorical denial
(Wirtschqftsprognose, Untersuchung ihrer Voranssetzungen und MGglich-

keiten, Wien, 1928) of the possibility of forecasting seems to be
due only to the fact that he demands more from forecasting than
is justifiable. Even the ability to forecast a hailstorm would not
be useless - but, on the contrary, very valuable - if the latter could
thereupon be averted by firing rockets at the clouds 1
36

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

having an important bearing on the Trade Cycle,
our position is a peculiar one. We can deduce
from general insight how the majority of people
will behave under certain conditions; but the
actual behaviour of these masses at a given
moment, and therefore the conditions to which our
theoretical conclusions must be applied, can only
be ascertained by the use of complicated statistical
methods. This is especially true when a phenomenon is influenced by a number of partly known
circumstances, such as, e.g., seasonal changes.
Here very complicated statistical investigations
are needed to ascertain whether these circumstances whose presence indicates the applicability
of theoretical conclusions were in fact operative.
Often statistical analysis may detect phenomena
which have, as yet, no theoretical explanation,
and which therefore necessitate either an extension
of theoretical speculation or a search for new
determining conditions. But the explanation of
the phenomena thus detected, if it is to serve as a
basis for forecasts of the future, must in every case
utilize other methods than statistically observed
regularities; and the observed phenomena will
37

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
have to be deduced from the theoretical system,
independently of empirical detection.
The dependence of statistical research on preexisting theoretical explanation hardly needs further emphasis. This holds good not only as regards
the practical utilization of its results, but also in the
course of its working, in which it must look to
theory for guidance in selecting and delimiting the
phenomena to be investigated. The oft-repeated
assertion that statistical examination of the Trade
Cycle should be undertaken without any theoretical
prejudice is therefore always based on selfdeception.*
• Prof. Bullock, the Principal of the Harvard Economic Service
(now the Harvard Economic Society) constantly emphasizes the complete absence of theoretical prepossession with which the work of the Institute is carried out. Sincere as this belief unquestionably is, however,
one may doubt its validity when one reads, for instance, the following
account given by Prof. Bullock's chief collaborator, Mr. W. M.
Persons, the inventor of the famous Harvard Barometer. Here he
attempts the following popular explanation of the latter:—'This
account of the business cycle, based upon our statistical analysis,
revolves about the fluctuation of short-time interest rates, speculation,
and business. We may think of interest rates as varying inversely
with the amount of the bank reserves in the credit reservoir. The flow
in the supply pipe to this reservoir depends upon the volume of gold
imports, gold production, and the volume of paper currency. There
are two outlets from this reservoir of credit: one pipe furnishes credit
for speculation in securities; the other pipe is for the flow of credit

38

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE
On the whole, one can say without exaggeration
that the practical value of statistical research
depends primarily upon the soundness of the
theoretical conceptions on which it is based.
To decide upon the most important problems of
the Trade Cycle remains the task of theory; and
whether the money and labour so freely expended
on statistical research in late years will be repaid by
the expected success depends primarily on whether /
the development of theoretical understanding keeps
pace with the exploration of the facts. For we
must not deceive ourselves: not only do we now
lack a theory which is generally accepted by
into business. When the level of credit in the reservoir is high, and
perhaps the outlet to business is partially clogged, the flow of funds
into speculation begins. After this flow goes on for some time, however, and the flow into business increases, the level of credit in the
reservoir falls. Obstruction is offered to the flow into speculative
markets by the devices of higher interest rates and direct discrimination against speculation and in favour of business. The outlet into
speculation therefore becomes clogged but the flow into business goes
on. The level in the reservoir becomes still lower until the time is
reached when bankers consider it dangerous to allow the outflow
to continue. We then have a halt in further credit expansion, or to use
our illustration, both outlets are clogged for a time and bank reserves
are brought back to normal by allowing the supply to again fill the
tank.' ('A non-technical explanation of the index of general business
conditions,' The Review of Economic Statistics, prel. vol. ii, Cambridge, 1920. p. 47).
39

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
economists, but we do not even possess one
which could be formulated in such an unexceptionable way, and worked out in such detail, as
eventually to command such acceptance. A series
of important interconnections have been established and some principles of the greatest significance expounded; but no one has yet undertaken
the decisive step which creates a complete theory
by using one of these principles to incorporate all
the known phenomena into the existing system
in a satisfactory way. To realize this, of course,
does not hinder us from pursuing either economic
research or economic policy; but then we must
always remember that we are acting on certain
theoretical assumptions whose correctness has not
yet been satisfactorily established. The 'practical
man* habitually acts on theories which he does not
consciously realize; and in most cases this means
that his theories are fallacious. Using a theory
consciously, on the other hand, always results in
some new attempt to clear up the interrelations
which it assumes, and to bring it into harmony with
which theoretical assumptions; that is, it results in
the pursuit of theory for its own sake.
40

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE
IV

The value of business forecasting depends upon
correct theoretical concepts; hence there can, at
the present time, be no more important task in
this field than the bridging of the gulf which
divides monetary from non-monetary theories.*
This gulf leads to differences of opinion in the
front rank of economists; and is also the characteristic line of division between Trade Cycle
theory in Germany and in America — where
business forecasting originated. Such an analysis
of the relation between these two main
trends seems to me especially important because
* Since the publication of the German edition of this book, I have
become less convinced that the difference between monetary and
non-monetary explanations is the most important point of disagreement
between the various Trade Cycle theories. On the one hand, it
seems to me that within the monetary group of explanations the
difference between those theorists who regard the superficial phenomena of changes in the value of money as decisive factors in determining cyclical fluctuations, and those who lay emphasis on the real
changes in the structure of production brought about by monetary
causes, is much greater than the difference between the latter group
and such so-called non-monetary theorists as Prof. Spiethoff and Prof.
Cassel. On the other hand, it seems to me that the difference between
these explanations, which seek the cause of the crisis in the
scarcity of capital, and the so-called 'under-consumption' theories, is
theoretically as well as practically of much more far-reaching importance than the difference between monetary and non-monetary theories.
41

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
of the peculiar position of the monetary theories.
Largely through the fault of some of their bestknown advocates in Germany, monetary explanations became discredited, and their essentials
have, moreover, been much misunderstood; while,
on the other hand, the reaction against them forms
the main reason for the prevailing scepticism as
to the possibility of any economic theory of the
Trade Cycle — a scepticism which may seriously
retard the development of theoretical research.*
There is a fundamental difficulty inherent in
all Trade Cycle theories which take as their starting point an empirically ascertained disturbance
of the equilibrium of the various branches of production. This difficulty arises because, in stating
the effects of that disturbance, they have to make
use of the logic of equilibrium theory .f Yet this
logic, properly followed through, can do no more
• Cf. the above-mentioned essay of A. Lowe in the 'Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv.'
f By 'equilibrium theory' we here primarily understand the
modern theory of the general interdependence of all economic
quantities, which has been most perfectly expressed by the Lausanne
School of theoretical economics. The significant basic concept of this
theory was contained in James Mill's and J. B. Say's Theorie des
Debouches. Cf. L. Miksch, Gibt es eine allgemeine Uberproduktion?
Jena, 1929.

42

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE
than demonstrate that such disturbances of equilibrium can come only from outside — i.e. that
they represent a change in the economic data
— and that the economic system always reacts
to such changes by its well-known methods
of adaptation, i.e. by the formation of a new
equilibrium. No tendency towards the special
expansion of certain branches of production, however plausibly adduced, no chance shift in demand,
in distribution or in productivity, could adequately
explain, within the framework of this theoretical
system, why a general 'disproportionality' between
supply and demand should arise. For the essential
means of explanation in static theory, which is, at
the same time, the indispensable assumption for
the explanation of particular price variations, is
the assumption that prices supply an automatic
mechanism for equilibrating supply and demand.
The next section will deal with these difficulties
in more detail: a mere hint should therefore be
sufficient at this point. At the moment we have
only to draw attention to the fact that the problem
before us cannot be solved by examining the effect
of a certain cause within the framework, and by
43

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the methods, of equilibrium theory. Any theory
which limits itself to the explanation of empirically
observed interconnections by the methods of
elementary theory necessarily contains a selfcontradiction. For Trade Cycle theory cannot
aim at the adaptation of the adjusting mechanism
of static theory to a special case; this scheme of
explanation must itself be extended so as to explain
how such discrepancies between supply and demand can ever arise. The obvious, and (to my
mind) the only possible way out of this dilemma, is
to explain the difference between the course of
events described by static theory (which only
permits movements towards an equilibrium, and
which is deduced by directly contrasting the supply
of and the demand for goods) and the actual course
of events, by the fact that, with the introduction
of money (or strictly speaking with the introduction of indirect exchange), a new determining
cause is introduced. Money being a commodity
which, unlike all others, is incapable of finally
satisfying demand, its introduction does away
with the rigid interdependence and self-sufficiency
of the 'closed* system of equilibrium, and makes
44

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

possible movements which would be excluded
from the latter. Here we have a starting-point
which fulfils the essential conditions for any satisfactory theory of the Trade Cycle. It shows, in a
purely deductive way, the possibility and the
necessity of movements which do not at any given
moment tend towards a situation which, in the
absence of changes in the economic 'data', could
continue indefinitely. It shows that, on the contrary, these movements lead to such a 'disproportionality' between certain parts of the system
that the given situation cannot continue.
But while it seems that it was a sound instinct
which led economists to begin by looking on the
monetary side for an explanation of cyclical
fluctuations, it also seems probable that the onesided development of the theory of money has, as
yet, prevented any satisfactory solution to the
problem being found. Monetary theories of the
Trade Cycle succeeded in giving prominence to
the right questions and, in many cases, made
important contributions towards their solution;
but the reason why an unassailable solution has
not yet been put forward seems to reside in the
45

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
fact that all the adherents of the monetary theory
of the Trade Cycle have sought an explanation
either exclusively or predominantly in the superficial phenomena of changes in the value of money,
while failing to pursue the far more profound and
fundamental effects of the process by which money
is introduced into the economic system, as distinct
from its effect on prices in general. Nor did they
follow up the consequences of the fundamental
diversity between a money economy and the
pure barter economy which is assumed in static
theory.*

Naturally it cannot be the business of this
essay to remove all defects and deficiencies from
the monetary theories of the Trade Cycle, or to
develop a complete and unassailable theory.
In these pages I shall only attempt to show the
general significance for this theory of the monetary
starting-point, and to refute the most important
• Similar views are expressed by W. Ropke, Kredit und Konjunktur.
Jahrbiicher fiir Nationaldkonomie und Statistik, 3rd series, vol. 69, pp,
264 et seq.

46

THE PROBLEM OF THE TRADE CYCLE

objections raised against the monetary explanation
by proving that certain rightly exposed deficiencies
of some monetary theories do not necessarily
follow from the monetary approach. All that is
wanted, therefore, is, first, a proof, using as our
examples some of the best-known non-monetary
theories, that the 'real' explanations adduced by
them do not, in themselves, suffice to build up a
complete and consistent theory; secondly, a
demonstration that the existing monetary theories
contain the germ of a true explanation, although all
suffer, more or less, from that over-simplification
of the problem which results from reducing all
cyclical fluctuations to fluctuations in the value
of money; finally that the monetary starting-point
makes it possible, in fact, to show deductively
the inevitability of fluctuation under the existing
monetary system and, indeed, under almost any
other which can be imagined. It will be shown, in
particular, that the Wicksell-Mises theory of the
effects of a divergence between the 'natural' and
the money rate of interest already contains the
most important elements of an explanation, and
has only to be freed from any direct reference to a
47

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

purely imaginary 'general money value* (as has
already been partly done by Prof. Mises) in order
to form the basis of a Trade Cycle theory
sufficing for a deductive explanation of all the
elements in the Trade Cycle.

NON-MONETARY THEORIES
OF THE TRADE CYCLE

CHAPTER

II

NON-MONETARY THEORIES
OF THE TRADE CYCLE
i

ANY attempt at a general proof, within the compass
of a short essay, of the assertion that non-monetary
theories of the Trade Cycle inevitably suffer from
a fundamental deficiency, appears to be confronted
with an insuperable obstacle by reason of the very
multiplicity of such theories. If it were necessary
for our purpose to show that every one of the
numerous disequilibrating forces which have been
made starting-points for Trade Cycle theories
was, in fact, non-existent, then the conditions of
our success would, indeed, be impossible of
fulfilment; for not only would it be almost impossible to deal with all extant theories but no conclusive answer could result, seeing that we should still
have to reckon with a new and hitherto unrefuted
crop of such theories in the future. Moreover^
5*

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the existence of most of the interconnections
elaborated by the various Trade Cycle theories can
hardly be denied, and our task is rather their
co-ordination in a unified logical structure than
the development of entirely new and different
trains of thought. In fact, it is by no means
necessary to question the material correctness of
the individual interconnections emphasized in the
various non-monetary theories in order to show
that they do not afford a sufficient explanation.
As has already been indicated in the first chapter,
none of them is able to overcome the contradiction
between the course of economic events as described
by them and the fundamental ideas of the theoretical system which they have to utilize in order to
explain that course. It will, therefore, be sufficient
to show, by examination of some of the best-known
theories, that they do not answer this fundamental
question; nor can they ever do so by their present
methods and by reference to the circumstances
which they now regard as relevant to TradeCycle theory. When, however, the question is
answered on different lines, viz., by reference to
monetary circumstances, it can be shown that
52

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
the elements of explanation adduced by different
theories lose their independent importance and
fall into a subordinate position as necessary
consequences of the monetary cause.
It is rather difficult to select the main types of
Trade-Cycle theory for this purpose, since we
have no theoretically satisfactory classification. The
latest attempts at such classifications, by Mr. W. M.
Persons,* Professor W. C. Mitchell,f and Mr. A.
H. Hansen,J show that the usual division, which
relies on external features and hardly touches the
solution of fundamental problems, gives far too
wide a scope for arbitrary decisions. As Professor
Lowe§ has correctly emphasized (and as should be
obvious from what has been said above) the only
classification which could be really unobjectionable
would be one which proceded according to the
manner in which such theories explain the absence
of the 'normal course' of economic events, as pre•'Theories of Business Fluctuations* {Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. xli, p. 923).
t Business Cycles: the Problem and its Setting (New York 1927).
% Business Cycle Theory: its Development and present Status
(Boston, 1927).
§ See Der GegenwartigeStandder Konjunkturforschung, p. 359 et seq.

53

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
sented by static theory. In fact, the various theories—
as we shall hope to show later — make no attempt
whatever to do this. As there is, therefore, no
classification which would serve our purpose,
our choice must be more or less arbitrary; but by
choosing some of the best known theories and
exemplifying the train of thought to which our
objection particularly applies, we should be
able to make the general validity of the latter
sufficiently clear. The task is made rather easier
by the fact that there does exist to-day, on at least
one point, a far-reaching agreement among the
different theories. They all regard the emergence
of a disproportionality among the various productive groups, and in particular the excessive production of capital goods, as the first and main thing
to be explained. The development of theory owes
a real debt to statistical research in that, to-day,
there is at least no substantial disagreement as to
the thing to be explained.
There is, however, a point to be emphasized
here. The modern habit of going beyond the
actual crisis and seeking to explain the entire cycle,
suffers inherently from the danger of paying less
54

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCEL

and less attention to the crucial problem. In
particular, the attempt to give the object of the
theory as neutral a name as possible (such as
'Industrial fluctuations' or * Cyclical movements of
Industry') threatens to drive the real theoretical
problem more into the background than was the
case in the old theory of crisis. The simple fact
that economic development does not go on quite
uniformly, but that periods of relatively rapid
change alternate with periods of relative stagnation,
does not in itself constitute a problem. It is sufficiently explained by the adjustment of the economic system to irregular changes in the data —
changes whose occurrence we always have to
assume and which cannot be further explained by
economic science. The real problem presented to
economic theory is: Why does not this adjustment
come about smoothly and continuously, just as a
new equilibrium is formed after every change in
the data? Why is there this temporary possibility
of developments leading away from equilibrium
and finally, without any changes in data, necessitating a change in the economic trend? The phenomena of the upward trend of the cycle and of the
55

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

culminating boom constitute a problem only because they inevitably bring about a slump in sales
— i.e. a falling-off of economic activity — which
is not occasioned by any corresponding change in
the original economic data.

11

The prevailing disproportionality theories are
in agreement in one respect. They all see the
cause of the slump in the fact that, during the
boom, for various reasons, the productive apparatus is expanded more than is warranted by the
corresponding flow of consumption; there finally
appears a scarcity of finished consumption goods,
thus causing a rise in the price of such goods
relatively to the price of production goods (which
amounts to the same thing as a rise in the rate of
interest) so that it becomes unprofitable to employ
the enlarged productive apparatus or, in many
cases, even to complete it. At present there is
hardly a recognized theory which does not give
this idea, which we only sketch for the moment,*
•Cf. below, p. 212 et seq. esp. p. 217.
56

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

a decisive place in its argument, and we should
therefore be well advised to begin by seeing how
the various theories try to deal with the phenomenon in question. Apart from the monetary theories,
which, as will be shown later, can only be considered
satisfactory if they explain that phenomenon, there
are two groups of explanations which can be entirely
disregarded. In the first place there is nothing to
be gained from an examination of those theories
which seek to explain cyclical fluctuations by corresponding cyclical changes in certain external
circumstances, while merely using the unquestionable methods of equilibrium theory to explain the
economic phenomena which follow from these
changes. To decide on the correctness of these
theories is beyond the competence of Economics.
In the second place, it is best, for the moment, to
exclude from consideration those theories whose
argument depends so entirely on the assumption
of monetary changes that when the latter are
excluded no systematic explanation is left. This
category includes Professor J. Schumpeter,* Pro• Theorie der toirUchaftlichen Enturicklung, 2nd

and Leipzig, 1926.

57

edit.,

Muchen

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
fessor E. Lederer,* and Professor G. Cassel,f and
to a certain extent Professor W. C. Mitchell and
Professor J. Lescure.J We shall have to consider
later, with regard to this category, how far it is
theoretically permissible to treat these monetary
interconnections as determining conditions on the
same footing as the other phenomena used in
explanation.
It is, of course, impossible at this point to go
into the peculiarities of all types of theory, as
worked out by their respective authors. We must
leave out of account the forms in which the
various explanations are presented, and confine
ourselves to certain underlying types of theory
which recur in a number of different guises.
Inevitably, this treatment of contemporary theories
must fail to do full justice to the intellectual
merits exemplified in each; but for the purposes
• Konjunktur und Krisen: Grundriss der Sozialokonomik, Abt. IV,
Teil I. Tubingen 1926; also Zur Morphologie der Krisen in Die
Wirtschaftstheorie der Gegenwart, cited above, edited by H. Mayer,

vol iv, Vienna, 1928.
f Theory of Social Economy.
t Des Crises g€n€rales et piriodiques de surproduction. Paris, 1913;
and Krisenlehre in Die Wirtschaftstheorie der Gegenzvart, ed. by H.

Mayer, vol. iv, Vienna 1928.

58

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
of this chapter — that is, to show the fundamental
objections to which all non-monetary theories
of the Trade Cycle are open — this somewhat
cursory and imperfect treatment may be enough.
We may begin our demonstration by pointing
out that all those forms of disproportionality
theory with which we have to deal here rest on
the existence of quite irregular fluctuations of
'economic data' (that is, the external determining
circumstances of the economic system, including
human needs and abilities). From this assumption,
they try to explain in one way or another that the
fluctuations in consumption or some other element
in the economic system occasioned by these
changes are followed by relatively greater changes
in the production of production goods.* These
wide fluctuations in the industries making production goods bring about a disproportionality
between them and the consumption industries
• It should be noted here that the assumption of initial changes
in the economic data, which no theory of the Trade Cycle can dispense
with, in itself throws no light on the proper way of explaining cyclical
fluctuations. It is not the occurrence of disturbances of equilibrium,
necessitating readjustment, which presents a problem to Trade Cycle
theory; it is the fact that this adjustment is brought about only after a
series of movements have taken place which cannot be considered

59

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
to such an extent that a reversal of the movement
becomes necessary. It is not, therefore, the simple
fact of fluctuation in the production of capital goods
(which is certainly inevitable in the course of
economic growth) which has to be explained.
The real problem is the growth of excessive
fluctuations in the capital goods industries out of
the inevitable and irregular fluctuations of the
rest of the economic system, and the disproportional development, arising from these, of the
two main branches of production. We can distinguish three main types of non-monetary
theories explaining the exaggerated effect of
given fluctuations on capital goods industries.
The most common, at the moment, are those
explanations which try to show that, on account
of the technique of production, an increase in the
demand for consumption goods, whether expected
'adjustments' in the sense used by the theory of economic equilibrium.
'The phenomenon is never made clear until it is explained why its
cause, whatever it may be, does not call forth a continuous equilibrating process' (Prof. J. Schumpeter, Theorie der wirtschaftlichen
Entwicklung, 2nd ed., Miinchen and Leipzig, 1926). These changes
of data could serve as a complete explanation only if it could be shown
that the successive phases of the Trade Cycle are conditioned by a
series of such changes, following each other in a certain order.
60

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

or actual, tends to bring about a relatively larger
increase in the production of goods of a higher
order, either generally or in a certain group of
these goods. Hardly less common, and differing
only in appearance, are explanations which seek
to derive these augmented fluctuations from
special circumstances (non-monetary in character)
arising in the field of savings and investment.
Finally, as a third group, we must mention certain
psychological theories, which, for the most part,
have however no pretension to rank as independent
explanations and which merely reinforce other
arguments, and are open to the same objections
as the two other main types.

in
We shall mention only the most important
of our objections to the first type, which is the
easiest to discuss from this point of view. It is
common to so many economists that it is hardly
necessary to mention particular representatives.
The simplest way of deductively explaining
excessive fluctuations in the production of capital
61

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

goods is by reference to the long period of time
which is necessary, under modern conditions, for
preparing the fixed capital goods which enable
the expansion of the productive process to take
place.* According to a widely held view, this
circumstance alone is enough to make every
increase in the sales of consumption goods, whether
brought about by an intensification of demand or
by a fall in the costs of production, capable of
bringing about a more than proportional increase
in the production of intermediary goods. This is
explained either by the individual producer's
ignorance of what his competitors are doing, or —
as is common in American writings — by the
'cumulative effect' of each change in the sale of
consumption goods on the higher stages of
production. Owing to circumstances which will
be explained later, the leading idea in all these
types of explanation is that the long period which,
with the present technique of production, elapses
between the beginning of a productive process and
• Cf. A. Aftalion: Les crises piriodiques de surproduction, Paris, 1913,

Bks. ii-vi, Chaps, in to vm; and D. H. Robertson, Industrial Fluctuations, London, 1915, p. 14.
6*

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

the arrival of its final product at the market,
prevents the gradual adjustment of production to
changes in demand through the agency of prices
and makes it possible, from time to time, for an
excessively large supply to be thrown on the
market. This idea is supported by another, which
however, can be independently and more widely
applied; that is, that every change in demand\
from the moment of its appearance, propagates
itself cumulatively through all the grades of
production, from the lowest to the highest. This
cumulative effect arises because at each stage,
besides the change which would be appropriate
to the actual shift in demand, another change
arises from the adjustment of stocks and of
productive apparatus to the alteration in market
conditions.* An increase in the demand for
consumption goods will not merely call forth
a proportional increase in the demand for goods of
a higher order: the latter will also be increased by
the amount needed to raise current stocks to a
t Cf. T. N. Carver, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1903-4, p.
492; A. Aftalion, Journal d'Economie Politique, 1909, pp. 215 ff.\
W. C, Mitchell, op. cit.; and D. H. Robertson, op. cit., p. iZ2ff.
63

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
proportional level, and, finally, by the further
amount by which the requirements for producing
new means of production exceed those for keeping
the existing means of production intact. (For
instance, an extension of 10 per cent, in one
particular year, in the machinery of a factory which
normally renews 10 per cent of its machinery
annually, causes an increase of ioo per cent in the
production of machinery — i.e. a given increase
in the demand for consumption goods occasions
a tenfold increase in the production of productiongoods.) This idea is offered as an adequate
reason not only for the relatively greater fluctuations in production-goods industries but also for
their excessive expansion in periods of boom.
Similarly, the extensive use of durable capital
equipment in the modern economy is often singled
out for responsibility.* Industries using heavy
equipment are prone to excessive expansion in
boom periods because small increments in this
equipment are impossible; expansion must necessarily take place by sudden jerks. Once the new
equipment is available, on the other hand, the
#

Cf. D. H. Robertson: op. cit., pp. 31 et seq.
64

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

volume of production has little influence on total
costs, which go on even if no production takes
place at all. New inventions and new needs, however, although they are often adduced as explaining
the accelerated and excessive growth of capital
goods industries, cannot be dealt with on the same
footing. They only represent a special group of
the many possible causes from which the cumulative processes described above may originate.
IV

There is virtually no doubt that all these
interconnections, and many others which are given
prominence in various Trade Cycle theories and
which similarly tend to disturb economic equilibrium, do actually exist; and any Trade Cycle
theory which claims to be comprehensively
worked out must take them into consideration.
But none of them get over the real difficulty —
namely: Why do the forces tending to restore
equilibrium become temporarily ineffective and
why do they only come into action again when it is
too late? They all try to explain this phenomenon
E

65

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

by a further, usually tacit, assumption, which one
of the advocates of these theories, Mr. C.
O. Hardy,* has himself put forward as their
common idea, by which, in my opinion, he brings
out, with the utmost clarity, their fundamental
weakness. He states that all those theories which
are based on the length of the production-period
under modern technical conditions agree in
regarding these conditions as a source of difficulty
to producers in adjusting production to the state
of the market; producing, as they must, for a
future period, the market possibilities of which are
necessarily unknown to them. He then emphasizes
that in general it is the task of the price-mechanism
to adjust supply to demand; he thinks, however,
that this mechanism is imperfect, if a long
period has to lapse between production and the
arrival of the product at the market, because
'prices and orders give information concerning the
prospective state of demand compared with the
known facts of the present and future supply,
• Risk and Risk Bearing, University of Chicago Press, 1923, p. 72.
See also Mr. Hardy's reply to the above criticism in the revised 2nd
Edition (1931), of the same book (p. 94), which, however, does not
seem to solve the fundamental difficulty.
66

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

but they give no clue to the changes in supply
which they themselves are likely to cause.'* He
tries to show how periodic over- and underproduction may result from an increase in demand
acting as an incentive to increased production.
He here states explicitly what others assume
tacitly, and thus his exposition completely gives
away the question-begging nature of all such
arguments. For he holds that under free competition, in the case considered, more and more
people try to profit by the favourable situation,
all ignoring one another's preparations, and 'no
force intervenes to check the continual increase in
production until it reflects itself in declining orders

and falling prices.^ In this statement (according
to which the price-mechanism comes into action
only when the products come on to the market,
while, until then, producers can regulate the
extent of their production solely according to the
estimated total volume of demand) the fundamental
error which can be shown to recur in all these
theories is plainly revealed. It arises from a misconception of the deliberations which regulate
• Op. cit., p. 73,

t Ibid. (My italics.)
67

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the entrepreneur's actions and of the significance
of the price-mechanism.
If the entrepreneur really had to guide his
decisions exclusively by his knowledge of the
quantitative increase in the total demand for his
product, and if the success of economic activity
were really always dependent on that knowledge,
no very complicated circumstances would be
needed to produce constant disturbances in
the relation between supply and demand. But the
entrepreneur in a capitalist economy is not — as
many economists seem to assume —in the same
situation as the dictator of a Socialist economy.
The protagonists of this view seem to overlook the
fact that production is generally guided not by
any knowledge of the actual size of the total
demand, but by the price to be obtained in the
market. In the modern exchange economy, the
entrepreneur does not produce with a view to
satisfying a certain demand — even if that phrase
is sometimes used — but on the basis of a calculation of profitability; and it is just that calculation
which will equilibrate supply and demand. He
is not in the least concerned with the amount by
68

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

which, in a given case, the total amount demanded
will alter; he only looks at the price which he can
expect to get after the change in question has taken
place. None of the theories under discussion
explains why these expectations should generally
prove incorrect. (To deduce their incorrectness
from the fact that over-production, arising from
false expectations, causes prices to fall, would be
mere argument in a circle.) Nor can this generalization be theoretically established by any other
method. For so long, at least, as disturbing
monetary influences are not operating, we have
to assume that the price which entrepreneurs
expect to result from a change in demand or from
a change in the conditions of production will
more or less coincide with the equilibrium price.
For the entrepreneur, from his knowledge of the
conditions of production and the market, will
generally be in a position to estimate the price
that will rule after the changes have taken place,
as distinct from the quantitative changes in the
total volume of demand. One can only say, as
to this prospective price of the product concerned,
that it is just as likely to be lower than the equili69

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
brium price as to be higher and that, on the average,
it should more or less coincide, since there is no
reason to assume that deviations will take place
only in one direction. But this prospective price
only represents one factor determining the extent
of production. The other factor, no less important
but all too often overlooked, is the price the
producer has to pay for raw materials, labourpower, tools and borrowed capital — i.e. his costs.
These prices, taken together, determine the
extent of production for all producers operating
under conditions of competition; and the producer's decisions as to his production must be
guided not only by changes in expectations as to
the price of his product, but also by changes in
his costs. To show how the interplay of these
prices keeps supply and demand, production and
consumption, in equilibrium, is the main object of
pure economics, and the analysis cannot be
repeated here in detail. It is, however, the task of
Trade Cycle theory to show under what conditions
a break may occur in that tendency towards
equilibrium which is described in pure analysis
— i.e. why prices, in contradiction to the con70

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

elusions of static theory, do not bring about
such changes in the quantities produced as would
correspond to an equilibrium situation. In order
to show that the theories under discussion do not
solve this problem, and only as far as is necessary
for this purpose, we shall now study the most
important of the interconnections which bring
about equilibrium under the assumptions of
static theory.

We may attempt this task by asking what
kind of reactions will be brought about by the
original change in the economic data, which is
supposed to cause the excessive extension of the
production of capital goods, and how, in such
cases, a new equilibrium can result. Whether the
original impetus comes from the demand side or
the supply side, the assumption from which we
have to start is always a price —or rather an
expected price — which renders it profitable, under
the new conditions, to extend production. As
stated above, we can assume — since none of the
71

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
theories in question give any reason to the
contrary — that this expected price will approximate to the new equilibrium price. We can assume,
that is, that if the impetus is a fall in unit costs, the
producer will consider the effects of an increased
supply; if the impetus is an increase in demand, he
will consider the increase in the cost per unit
following the increase in the quantity produced.
The existence of a general misconception in this
respect would require a special explanation, and
unless this is to rest on a circular argument, it
can only be accounted for by a monetary explanation, which we cannot consider at this point.
Now the length of time required to produce
modern means of production cannot induce a
tendency to an excessive extension of the productive apparatus; or, more accurately, any such
tendency is bound to be effectively eliminated
by the increase in price of the factors of production.
Thus we cannot give a sufficient explanation for
the occurrence of the disproportionality in these
terms. This becomes obvious as soon as we drop
the assumption that the price-mechanism begins
to function only from the moment at which the
72

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
increased supply comes on the market, and
consider that whenever the price obtainable for the
finished product is correctly estimated, the adjustment of the prices of factors of production must
ensure that the amount produced is limited to
what can be sold at remunerative prices. The
mere existence of a lengthy production period
cannot be held to impair the working of the price
mechanism, so long, at any rate, as no additional
reason can be given for the occurrence of a general
miscalculation in the same direction concerning
the effect of the original change in data on the
prices of the products.
We must next inquire what truth there is in
the alleged tendency towards a cumulative propagation of the effect of every increase (or decrease)
of demand from the lower to the higher stages of
production. The arguments given below against
this frequently-adduced theory must serve at the
same time to refute all other theories based on
similar technical considerations; for space will not
permit us to go into every one of these, and the
reader can be trusted to apply the same reasoning
as is employed in this demonstration to all similar
73

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
explanations — such as those based on the
necessary discontinuity of the extension of productive apparatus. Does the cumulative effect
of every increase in demand represent a new
price-determining factor, as a result of which
prices, and therefore quantities produced, will
be different from those needed to achieve equilibrium? Is the regulating effect of prices on the
extent of production really suspended by the
fact that when turnover increases merchants try
to increase stocks, and manufacturers to extend
production? If the increase in the prices of production goods were the only counterbalancing
factor to set against the increase in the demand
for these goods, it would still be possible for more
investments to be undertaken than would prove
permanently profitable. According to the view we
are considering, there will be an increase in the
quantity of factors of production demanded at any
price, as compared with the equilibrium situation,
and therefore it would appear possible that, at
every price at which producers still think they can
profitably make use of this quantity, investments
will be undertaken to an unwarrantable extent.
74

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
This way of stating the position, however,
entirely overlooks the fact that every attempt to
extend the productive apparatus must necessarily
bring about, besides the rise in factor prices, a
further checking force — viz. a rise in the rate
of interest. This greatly strengthens the effect
of the rise in factor prices. It makes a greater
margin between factor-prices and product-prices
necessary just when this margin threatens to
diminish. The maintenance of equilibrium is
thus further secured.
For we must not forget that not only the volume
of current production, but also the size, at any
given moment, of the productive apparatus,
(including stocks, which cannot be omitted) is
regulated through prices, and especially — apart
from the above-mentioned prices for goods and
services —by the price paid for the use of capital,
that is, interest. Whatever particular explanation
of interest we may accept, all contemporary
theories agree in regarding the function of interest
as one of equalizing the supply of capital and the
demand arising in various branches of production.
Until some special reason can be adduced why
75

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
it should not fulfil this function in any given
case, we have to assume, in accordance with the
fundamental thesis of static theory, that it always
keeps the supply of capital goods in equilibrium
with that of consumption goods. This assumption
is just as indispensable, and just as inevitable,
as a starting-point, as the main assumption that
the supply of and demand for any kind of goods
will be equilibrated by movements in the prices
of those goods. In our case, when we are considering a tendency to enlarge the productive apparatus
and the size of stocks, this function must be performed in such a way as to increase the rate of
interest, and hence the necessary margin of profit
between the price of the products and that of the
means of production. This, however, automatically
excludes that part of the increase in the demand
for productive goods, which would have been
satisfied despite the increase in their prices if
the rise in the rate of interest had not taken place.
None of the various Trade Cycle theories based on
some alleged peculiarity of the technique of production can even begin to explain why the
equilibrium position, determined by the various
76

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

above-mentioned processes of price formation,
should be reached at a different point from
where it would be without these peculiarities.
Now as regards the prices of goods and services
used for productive purposes, there seems to be
no reason why they should not fulfil their function
of equilibrating supply and demand. For supply
and demand are here in direct relation with one
another, so that any discrepancy which may arise
between them, at a given price must, directly and
immediately, lead to a change in that price. Only
when we come to consider the second group of
prices (those paid for borrowed capital or, in
other words, interest) is it conceivable that
disturbances might creep in, since, in this case,
price formation does not act directly, by equalizing
the marginal demand for and supply of capital
goods, but indirectly, through its effect on money
capital, whose supply need not correspond to
that of real capital. But the process by which
divergences can arise between these two is left
unexplained by all the theories with which we
have hitherto dealt. Yet before going on to see
how far interest may present such a breach in the
77

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
strict system of equilibrium as may serve to explain
cyclical disturbances, we must briefly examine
the explanation offered by the second important
group of non-monetary theories, which attempt
to explain the origin of periodical disturbances
of equilibrium purely through the phenomena
arising out of the accumulation and investment
of saving.*
VI

The earlier versions of these theories start
from the groundless and inadmissible assumption that unused savings are accumulated for a
time and then suddenly invested, thus causing
the productive apparatus to be extended in jerks.
Such versions can be passed over without further
analysis. For one thing, it is impossible to give
any plausible explanation why unused savings
should accumulate for a time;f for another thing,
* In revising the above paragraphs my notice has been called to the
fact that they are in many respects in accordance with the reasoning
of S. Budge in his Grundzuge der theoretischen Nationaldkonomie

(Jena, 1925, pp. 201 et seq.) to which I should therefore like to call
attention.
j " Cf. the very effective remarks of W. Eucken in his interesting
viva-voce report to the Zurich Assembly of the 'Verein fur Sozialpolitik'. (Schriften, 175, p. 295 et seq.)
78

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

even if such an explanation were forthcoming, it
would provide no clue to the disproportional
development in the production of capital goods.
The fact that the mere existence of fluctuations
in saving activity does not in itself explain this
problem is realized (in contrast to many other
economists) by the most distinguished exponent
of these theories, Prof. A. Spiethoff. This is plain
from his negative answer to the analogous question,
whether in a barter economy an increase in saving
can create the necessary conditions for depression.*
Indeed, it is difficult to see how spontaneous variations in the volume of saving (which are not
themselves open to further economic explanation,
and must therefore be regarded as changes of
data) within the limits in which they are actually
observed can possibly create the typical disturbances with which Trade Cycle theory is
concerned.!
• 'Krisen' in Handwdrterbuch der Staatswissenschaften, 4th cd., vol.
vi, 1925, p. 81.

t It is, however, not inconceivable, theoretically, that sudden and
violent fluctuations in the volume of saving might give rise to the
phenomena of a crisis during their downward swings. On this point,
see below Chap, v, p. 205.

79

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
Where, then, according to these theories, may
we find the reason for this genesis of disequilibrating disturbances in the processes of saving and
investment? We will keep to the basis of SpiethofFs
theory, which is certainly the most complete
of its kind. We may disregard his simple reference
to the Complexity of capital relations', for it does
not in itself provide an explanation. The main
basis of his explanation is to be found in the following sentence: * If capitalists and producers of immediate consumption goods want to keep their
production in step with the supply of acquisitive
loan capital, these processes should be consciously
adjusted to one another* * But the creation of
acquisitive loan capital ensues independently of
the production of intermediate goods and
durable capital goods; and conversely, the
latter can be produced without the entrepreneur
knowing the extent to which acquisitive capital
(i.e. savings) exists and is available for investment;
* Op. cit., p. 76. My italics. The same general view, though in a
somewhat different connection, has since been expressed by Mr. J. M.
Keynes in several passages of his Treatise on Money, 1930. Cf., foi
example, vol. i, p. 175 and especially p. 279: 'There is, indeed, no
possibility of intelligent foresight designed to equate savings and
investment unless it is exercised by the banking system.'
80

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

and thus there is always a danger that one of these
processes may lag behind while the other hastens
forward. This reference to the entrepreneur's
ignorance of the situation belongs, however, to
that category of explanation which we had to
reject earlier. Instead of showing why prices —
and in this case, particularly, the price of
capital, which is interest — do not fulfil, or
fail to fulfil adequately, their normal function
of regulating the volume of production, it unexpectedly overlooks the fact that the extent of
production is regulated on the basis not of a
knowledge of demand but through price determination. Assuming that the rate of interest
always determines the point to which the available
volume of savings enables productive plant to be
extended — and is it only by this assumption that
we can explain what determines the rate of interest
at all — any allegations of a discrepancy between
savings and investments must be backed up by a
demonstration why, in the given case, interest
does not fulfil this function.* Professor Spiethoff,
* Elements of the same reasoning can also be found in G. Cassel
Theory of Social Economy, 4th German edition, 1927, p. 575; when
F

81

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
like most of the theorists of this group, evades
this necessary issue — as we shall see later — by
introducing another assumption of crucial importance. It is only by means of this assumption
that the causes which he particularly enumerates
in his analysis gain significance as an explanation;
and therefore it should not have been treated as
a self-evident condition, to be casually mentioned,
but as the starting-point of the whole theoretical
analysis.

VII

Before going into this question, however,
we must turn our attention to the importance in
Trade Cycle theory of errors of forecast, and, in
connection with these, to a third group of theories
which have not been considered up to now —
the psychological theories. Here, as elsewhere in
our investigations, we shall only be concerned
with those theories which are endogenous — i.e.
he derives high-conjuncture from an overestimate of the supply of
capital (i.e. savings) which is available to take over the supply of
real capital produced.

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

which explain the origin of general under- and
over-estimation from the economic situation itself,
and not from some external circumstance such
as weather changes, etc. As we said earlier,
fluctuations of economic activity which merely
represent an adjustment to corresponding changes
in external circumstances present no problem
to economic theory. The various psychological
factors cited are only relevant to our analysis in
so far as they can cast light on its central problem:
that is, how an over-estimate of future demand can
occasion a development of the productive apparatus
so excessive as automatically to lead to a reaction,
unprecipitated by other psychological changes.
Those who are familiar with the most distinguished
of these theories, that of Professor A. C. Pigou
(which, owing to lack of space, cannot be reproduced here)* will see at once that the endogenous
psychological theories are open to the same
objections as the two groups of theories which
we have already examined. Professor Pigou does
• Cf. A. C. Pigou, Industrial Fluctuations, London, 1927 (2nd
ed. 1929); and also O. Morgenstern, Qualitative und Quantitative
Konjunkturforschungy

Zeitschrift fiir die gesammte

vol. 84, Tubingen, 1928.

83

Staatszvissenschaft,

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
not explain why errors should arise in estimating
the effect, on the price of the final product, of an
increase in demand or a fall in cost; or, if the
estimate is correct, why the readjustment of the
prices of means of production should not check
the expansion of production at the right point. No
one would deny, of course, that errors can arise
as regards the future movements of particular
prices. But it is not permissible to assume
without further proof that the equilibrating
mechanism of the economic system will begin its
work only when the excessively increased product
due to these mistaken forecasts actually comes on
the market, the disproportional development continuing undisturbed up to that time. At one
point or another, all theories which start to explain
cyclical fluctuations by miscalculations or ignorance as regards the economic situation fall into
the same error as those naive explanations which
base themselves on the 'planlessness' of the
economic system. They overlook the fact that,
in the exchange economy, production is governed
by prices, independently of any knowledge of the
whole process on the part of individual producers,
84

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
so that it is only when the pricing process is itself
disturbed that a misdirection of production can
occur. The 'wrong' prices, on the other hand,
which lead to 'wrong' dispositions, cannot in turn
be explained by a mistake. Within the framework
of a system of explanations in which, as in all
modern economic theory, prices are merely expressions of a necessary tendency towards a state
of equilibrium, it is not permissible to reintroduce
the old Sismondian idea of the misleading effect
of prices on production without first bringing it
into line with the fundamental system of explanation.
VII I

It is, perhaps, scarcely necessary to point out
that all the objections raised against the nonmonetary theories, already cited in our investigations, are justified by one particular assumption
which we had to make in order to examine the
independent validity of the so-called 'real' explanations. In order to see whether the 'real' causes
(whose effect is always emphasized as a proof that
monetary changes are not the cause of cyclical
85

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
fluctuations) can provide a sufficient explanation
of the cycle, it has been necessary to study their
operation under conditions of pure barter. And
even if it were impossible to prove fully that,
under these conditions, no non-monetary explanation is sufficient, enough has been said, I think,
to indicate the general trend of thought which
would refute all theories based exclusively on
productive, market, financial or psychological
phenomena. None of these phenomena can help
us to dissolve the fundamental equilibriumrelationships which form the basis of all economic
explanation. And this dissolution is indispensable
if we are to protect ourselves against objections
such as those outlined above.
If the various theories comprised in these
groups are still able to offer a plausible explanation
of cyclical fluctuations, and if their authors do
not realize the contradictions involved, this is
due to the unconscious importation of an assumption incompatible with a purely 'real' explanation.
This assumption is adequate to dissolve the rigid
reaction-mechanisms of barter-economy, and thus
makes possible the processes described; but for
86

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
this very reason it should not be treated as a selfevident condition, but as the basis of the explanation itself. The condition thus tacitly assumed —
and one can easily prove that it is in fact assumed
in all the theories examined above — is the existence
of credit which, within reasonable limits, is always
at the entrepreneur's disposal at an unchanged
price. This, however, assumes the absence of the
most important controls which, in the barter
economy, keep the extension of the productive
apparatus within economically permissible limits.
Once we assume that, even at a single point, the
pricing process fails to equilibrate supply and demand',
so that over a more or less long period demand may
be satisfied at prices at which the available supply
is inadequate to meet total demand, then the march
of economic events loses its determinateness and a
range of indeterminateness appears, within which
movements can originate leading away from equilibrium. And it is rightly assumed, as we shall see
later on, that it is precisely the behaviour of interest,
the price of credit, which makes possible these
disturbances in price formation. We must not,
however, overlook the fact that the range of
87

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
indeterminateness thus created is 'indeterminate*
only in relation to the absolute determinateness
of barter economy. The new price formation,
together with the new structure of production
determined by it, must in turn conform to certain
laws, and the apparent indeterminateness does
not imply unfettered mobility of prices and
production. On the contrary, every departure from
the original equilibrium position is definitely determined by the new conditioning factor. But if it is
the existence of credit which makes these various
disturbances possible, and if the volume and
direction of new credits determines the extent
of deviations from the equilibrium position, it
is clearly not permissible to regard credit as a
kind of passive element, and its presence as a
self-evident condition. One must regard it
rather as the new determining factor whose
appearance causes these deviations and whose
effects must form our starting-point when deducing all those phenomena which can be observed
in cyclical fluctuations. Only when we have
succeeded in doing this can we claim to have
explained the phenomena described.
88

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

The neglect to derive the appearance of disproportionality from this condition, which must
be assumed in order to keep the argument within
the framework of equilibrium theory, leads to
certain consequences which are best exemplified
in the work of Professor Spiethoff. For, in his
theory, all important interconnections are worked
out in the fullest detail and none of the observed
phenomena remains unaccounted for. But he is
not able to deduce the various phenomena
described from the single factor which, by virtue
of its role in disturbing the inter-relationships
of general equilibrium, should form the basis of
his explanation. At each stage of his exposition
he calls in experience to back him up and to show
what deviations from the equilibrium position
actually occur within the given range of indeterminateness. Consequently it never becomes clear
why these phenomena must always occur as they
are described; and there always remains a possibility that, on some other occasion, they may
occur in a different way, or in a different order,
without his being able to account for this difference on the basis of his exposition. In other words
89

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the latter, however accurately and pertinently it
describes the observed phenomena, does not
qualify as a theory in the rigid sense of the word,
for it does not set out those conditions in whose
presence events must follow a scientifically determined course.

IX

Although there is no doubt that all nonmonetary Trade Cycle theories tacitly assume
that the production of capital goods has been made
possible by the creation of new credit, and although this condition is often emphasized in the
course of the exposition,* no one has yet proved
that this circumstance should form the exclusive
basis of the explanation. As far as strict logic
is concerned, it would not be impossible for such
theories to make use of some other assumption
which is capable of dissolving the rigid interrelationships of equilibrium and, therefore, of
forming the basis of an exact theoretical analysis.
But once we assume the existence of credit in our
• Cf. Spiethoff, op. cit., pp. 77-78 and 81.
90

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
explanation, we can attack the problem by seeing
how far the objections which were raised earlier
against the validity of the various theories under
a barter economy are invalidated when the new
assumption is made. Then we shall also be able
to determine whether this assumption has necessarily to be made in the usual form, or whether it
only represents a special instance of a far more
widely significant extension of the assumptions
of elementary theory.
The question we have to ask ourselves is:
What new price-determining factor is introduced
by the assumption of a credit supply which can
be enlarged while other conditions remain unchanged — a factor capable of deflecting the tendency towards the establishment of equilibrium
between supply and demand? Whether we necessarily accept that answer which, to my mind,
is the only possible one depends on whether we
agree with a certain basic proposition, which
could only be briefly outlined here and whose full
proof could only be given within the framework
of a complete system of pure economics; namely,
the proposition that, in a barter economy, interest
91

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
forms a sufficient regulator for the proportional
development of the production of capital goods
and consumption goods, respectively. If it is
admitted that, in the absence of money, interest
would effectively prevent any excessive extension
of the production of production goods, by keeping
it within the limits of the available supply of
savings, and that an extension of the stock of
capital goods which is based on a voluntary postponement of consumers' demand into the future
can never lead to disproportionate extensions,
then it must also necessarily be admitted that
disproportional developments in the production
of capital goods can arise only through the independence of the supply of free money capital
from the accumulation of savings; which in turn
arises from the elasticity of the volume of money.*
Every change in the volume of means of circulation is, in fact, an event to be distinguished
* 'Volume of money', in this connection, does not mean merely
the quantity of money in circulation but the volume of the money
stream or the effective circulation (in the usual terminology —
quantity times velocity of circulation). Even so, certain changes in
the effective circulation may have no disturbing effect because of
certain compensating changes in business organization. On this
point see my Prices and Production, Lecture iv.
92

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

from all other real causes, for the purpose of
theoretical reasoning; for, unlike all others, it
implies a loosening of the inter-relationships of
equilibrium. No change in 'real' factors, whether
in the amount of available means of production,
in consumers' preferences, or elsewhere, can do
away with that final identity of total demand and
total supply on which every conception of economic equilibrium is based. A change in the volume
of money, on the other hand, represents as it were
a one-sided change in demand, which is not
counterbalanced by an equivalent change in supply.
Money, being a pure means of exchange, not being
wanted by anyone for purposes of consumption,
must by its nature always be re-exchanged without ever having entirely fulfilled its purpose; thus
when it is present it loosens that finality and
'closedness' of the system which is the fundamental assumption of static theory, and leads to
phenomena which the closed system of static
equilibrium renders inconceivable.*
* This dissolution of the 'closedness' of the system, arising because
a change in the volume of money is a one-sided change in demand
unaccompanied by an equivalent change in supply, does not mean of
course that Lowe's plea for an 'open' system ('Wie ist Konjunktur-

93

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
Together with the 'closedness' of the system
there necessarily disappears the interdependence
of all its parts, and thus prices become possible
which do not operate according to the self-regulating principles of the economic system described
by static theory. On the contrary, these prices may
elicit movements which not only do not lead to
a new equilibrium position but which actually
create new disturbances of equilibrium. In this
way, through the inclusion of money among the
basic assumptions of exposition, it becomes
possible to deduce a priori phenomena such as
those observed in cyclical fluctuations. One
instance of these disturbances in the price mechanism, brought about by monetary influences — and
the one which is most important from the point
of view of Trade Cycle theory — is that putting
out of action of the'interest brake'which is taken
for granted by the Trade Cycle theories examined
above. How far this circumstance forms a suffitheorie iiberhaupt moglich') has been granted. (Lowe thinks of a
system when one or several 'independent variables' are drawn in for
explanation.) This plea, which one is tempted to believe has been
dictated by a desire to free theory from the trammels of exact deduction, has been justly and strongly criticized by E. Carell (op. cit. pp.
Z et seq. and 115).

94

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

cient basis for a theory of the Trade Cycle is a
problem of the concrete elaboration of monetary
explanation, and will, therefore, be dealt with in
the next chapter, where we shall examine how
far existing monetary theories have already tackled
those problems which are relevant to a theory
of the Trade Cycle.

The purpose of the foregoing chapter was to
show that only the assumption of primary monetary
changes can fulfil the fundamentally necessary
condition of any theoretical explanation of cyclical
fluctuations — a condition which is not fulfilled
by any theory based exclusively on 'real' processes.
If this is true then, at the outset of theoretical
exposition, those monetary processes must be
recognized as decisive causes. For we can gain a
theoretically unexceptionable explanation of complex phenomena only by first assuming the full
activity of the elementary economic interconnections
as shown by the equilibrium theory, and then introducing\ consciously and successivelyy just those
95

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
elements which are capable of relaxing these rigid

inter-relationships. All the phenomena which
become possible only as a result of this relaxation
must then be explained — as consequences of the
particular elements, through whose inclusion
among the elementary assumptions they become
explicable within the framework of general theory.
In place of such a theoretical deduction, we often
find an assertion, unfounded on any system, of
a far-reaching indeterminacy in the economy.
Paradoxically stated as it is, this thesis is bound
to have a devastating effect on theory; for it
involves the sacrifice of any exact theoretical deduction, and the very possibility of a theoretical
explanation of economic phenomena is rendered
problematic.
Similar objections of a general nature must be
levelled against another large group of theories
which we have not yet mentioned. This group
pays close attention to the monetary inter-connections and expressly emphasizes them as a
necessary condition for the occurrence of the
processes described. But they fail to pass from
this realization to the necessary conclusion; to
96

NON-MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

make it a starting-point for their theoretical
elaboration, from which all other particular phenomena have to be deduced. To this group
belongs the theory of Professor J. Schumpeter,
and certain 'underconsumption theories'* notably
that of Professor E. Lederer; and* similarly, the
various 'realistic' theories — that is, those which
renounce any unified theoretical deduction, such
as those of Professors G. Cassel, J. Lescure and
Wesley Mitchell. With regard to all these semimonetary explanations, we must ask whether —
once we have been compelled to introduce new
assumptions foreign to the static system— it is
not the first task of a theoretical investigation to
examine all the consequences which must necessarily ensue from this new assumption, and, in so
far as any phenomena are thus proved to be logically derivable from the latter, to regard them in
the course of the exposition as effects of the new
condition introduced. Only in this way is it
possible to incorporate Trade Cycle theory into
#
For a detailed criticism of a representative specimen of modern
under-consumption theories, that of Messrs. W. T. Foster and W.
Catchings, see my article on The 'Paradox' of Saving, 'Economica'

No. 32, May 1931.

G

97

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the static system which is the basis of all
theoretical economics; and, for this very reason,
the monetary elements must be regarded as decisive factors in the explanation of cyclical
fluctuations. The contrast therefore can be reduced to a question of theoretical presentation,
and it may even seem, when comparing these
theories, that the matter of the express recognition
of the monetary starting-point is one of purely
methodological or even terminological importance,
having no bearing on the essential solution of the
problem. But the same procedure which in one
case may only lead to a lapse from theoretical
elegance, breaking the unity of the theoretical structure, may in another case lead to the introduction
of thoroughly faulty reasoning, against which
only a rigid systematical procedure provides an
effective security.

98

MONETARY THEORIES OF
THE TRADE CYCLE

CHAPTER

III

MONETARY THEORIES
OF
THE T R A D E
CYCLE

THE argument of the foregoing chapters has
demonstrated the main reason for the necessity of
the monetary approach to Trade Cycle theory.
It arises from the circumstance that the automatic
adjustment of supply and demand can only be
disturbed when money is introduced into the
economic system. This adjustment must be
considered, according to the reasoning which
it most clearly expressed in Say's TMorie des
De'bouchds, as being always present in a state
of natural economy. Every explanation of the
Trade Cycle which uses the methods of economic
theory — which of course is only possible through
systematic co-ordination of the former with the
fundamental propositions of the latter — must,
therefore, start by considering the influences
IOI

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
which emanate from the use of money. By
following up their results it should be possible
to demonstrate the total effect on the economic
system, and formulate the result into a co-ordinated whole. This must be the aim of all theories
which set out to explain disturbances in equilibrium which, by their very nature, cannot be
regarded as immediate consequences of changes
in data, but only as arising out of the development
of the economic system itself. For that typical
form of disturbance, which experience shows to
be regularly recurrent and which can properly
be called the Trade Cycle, the influence of money
should be sought in the fact that when the volume
of money is elastic, there may exist a lack of
rigidity in the relationship between saving and
the creation of real capital. This is a fact
which nearly all the theories of the disproportional production of capital goods are agreed
in emphasizing. It is, therefore, the first task of
monetary Trade Cycle theory to show why, and
how, monetary influences directly bring about
regular disturbances in just this part of the economic system.
102

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
11

Naturally no attempt will be made at this
stage to present such a theory systematically.
This chapter is concerned with one particular
task: it attempts to show how far existing monetary
theories have already gone towards a satisfactory
solution of the problem of the Trade Cycle, and
what corrections are needed in order to invalidate
certain objections which, up to the present, have
appeared well founded.
It should already be clear that what we expect
from a monetary Trade Cycle theory differs considerably from what most of the monetary Trade
Cycle theories regard as the essential aim of their
explanation. We are in no way concerned to
explain the effect of the monetary factor on trade
fluctuations through changes in the value of money
and variations in the price level — subjects which
form the main basis of current monetary theories.
We expect such an explanation to emerge rather
from a study of all the changes originating in the
monetary field — more especially variations in its
quantity — changes which are bound to disturb
103

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the equilibrium inter-relationships existing in
the natural economy, whether the disturbance
shows itself in a change in the so-called 'general
value of money* or not. Our plea* for a monetary
approach to all Trade Cycle theory does not,
therefore, imply that henceforward such theories
should be exclusively, or even principally, based
on those arguments which usually predominate in writings on money, and which set out
to explain the general level of prices and alterations in the Value of money'. On the contrary,
monetary theory should not merely be concerned
with money for its own sake, but should also study
those phenomena which distinguish the money
economy from the equilibrium inter-relationships of barter economy which must always be
assumed by 'pure economics\
It must of course be admitted that many Trade
Cycle theorists regard the importance of monetary
theory as residing precisely in its ability to explain
the cause of fluctuations by reference to changes
in the general price level. Hence, it is not difficult
to understand why certain economists believe that,
once they have rejected this view, they have
104

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

settled once and for all with the monetary explanations of the Trade Cycle. It is not surprising
that monetary theories of the Trade Cycle should
be rejected by those who, like Professor A.
Spiethoff in his well-known work on the Quantity
Theory as 'Haussetheorie* * identify them with
the naive quantity-theory explanations which
derive fluctuations from changes in the pricelevel, f Against such a conception it can rightly
be urged that there are a number of phenomena
tending to bring about fluctuations, which certainly do not depend on changes in the value of
money, and which can, in fact, exert a disturbing
effect on the economic equilibrium without these
changes occurring at all. Again, in spite of many
assertions to the contrary, fluctuations in the
* 'Die Quantitatstheorie, insbesondere in ihrer Verwertbarkeit
als Haussetheorie'. Festgaben fur A. Wagner zur 70 Wiederkehr
seines Geburtstages, Leipzig, 1905, pp. 299 et seq.
f F. Burchardt, A. Lowe, and other more recent critics of monetary
trade cycle theory, also fall within this category. They recognize no
other kind of monetary influence than that which manifests itself
through changes in the price-level; and as a result of this undoubtedly
false conception they quite definitely conclude that there can be no
such thing as pure monetary trade cycle theory. In their view the
theories which are usually so called nearly always depend, in fact,
on what they regard as non-monetary factors.
105

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
general price-level need not always be ascribed
to monetary causes.*
111

But theories which explain the Trade
Cycle in terms of fluctuations in the general
price-level must be rejected not only because
they fail to show why the monetary factor disturbs
the general equilibrium, but also because their
fundamental hypothesis is, from a theoretical
standpoint, every bit as naive as that of those
theories which entirely neglect the influence of
money. They start off with a 'normal position*
which, however, has nothing to do with the normal
position obtaining in the static state; and they
are based on a postulate, the postulate of a constant
* The assertion that changes in the general level of prices must
always originate on the monetary side, as is argued for example by
Professors G. Cassel and Irving Fisher, obviously depends on circular
reasoning. It starts from the postulate that the amount of money
must be adjusted to changes in the volume of trade in such a way
that the price-level shall remain unchanged. If it is not, and the volume
of money remains unaltered, then, according to this remarkable
argument, the latter becomes the cause (!) of changes in the price level.
This statement is made quite baldly by Professor G. Cassel in his
book Money and Foreign Exchange After 1914. London, 1922.
106

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE OYCLE
price-level, which, if fulfilled, suffices in itself to
break down the inter-relationships of equilibrium.
All these theories, indeed, are based on the idea —
quite groundless but hitherto virtually unchallenged
— that if only the value of money does not change
it ceases to exert a direct and independent influence on the economic system. But this assumption
(which is present, more or less, in the work of all
monetary theorists), so far from being the necessary
starting-point for all trade cycle theory, is perhaps
the greatest existing hindrance to a successful
examination of the course of cyclical fluctuations.
It forces us to assume variations in the effective
quantity of money as given. Such variations,
however, always dissolve the equilibrium interrelationships described by static theory; but they
must necessarily be assumed if the value of money
is to remain constant despite changes in data;
and therefore they cannot be used to explain
deviations from the course of events which static
theory lays down. The only proper starting-point
for any explanation based on equilibrium theory
must be the effect of a change in the volume of
money; for this, in itself, constitutes a new state
107

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
of affairs, entirely different from that generally
treated within the framework of static theory.
In complete contrast to those economic changes
conditioned by 'real* forces, influencing simultaneously total supply and total demand, changes
in the volume of money have, so to speak, a onesided influence which elicits no reciprocal adjustment in the economic activity of different
individuals. By deflecting a single factor, without
simultaneously eliciting corresponding changes
in other parts of the system, it dissolves its 'closedness', makes a breach in the rigid reaction mechanism of the system (which rests on the ultimate
identity of supply and demand) and opens a way
for tendencies leading away from the equilibrium
position. As a theory of these one-sided influences,
the theory of monetary economy should, therefore, be able to explain the occurrence of phenomena which would be inconceivable in the barter
economy, and notably the disproportional developments which give rise to crises.* A starting• F. Wieser in Der Geldwert und seine geschichtlichen Verdnderungen

(Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtschaft Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung,
vol. xiii, 1907, p. 57, reprinted in F. Wieser, Abhandlungen;
Tubingen, 1929, p. 178) has dealt with the special effects of a 'onesided money supply*.
108

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

point for such explanations should be found in
the possibility of alterations in the quantity of
money occurring automatically and in the normal
course of events, under the present organization
of money and credit, without the need for violent
or artificial action by any external agency.
IV

Even if a systematic treatment of the Trade
Cycle problem has not yet been forthcoming, it
should be noted that, throughout the different
attempts at monetary explanation, there runs a
secondary idea which is closely allied to that of
the direct dependence of fluctuations on changes
in the value of money. It is true that this
idea is used merely as a subordinate device of
technique to assist in the explanation of fluctuations in the value of money. But its development included the analysis of the most important elements in the monetary factors chiefly
connected with the Trade Cycle. This was done
in the teaching which began with H. Thornton*
• An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of

Great Britain, London, 1802; especially pp. 287 et seq. This is
109

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
and D. Ricardo* and was taken up again by
H. D. Macleod,f H. Sidgwick, R. Giffen and
J. S. Nicholson,^ and finally developed by A.
Marshall^ K. Wicksell,|| and L. v. Mises,f
one of the most remarkable accomplishments in monetary theory,
and still commands great attention; cf. the references to it by K.
Wicksell in the preface to the second volume of his Vorlesungen
fiber Nationalokonomie auf Grundlage des Marginalprinzipes,

Jena,

1922, p. xii; and Burchardt, op. cit. For a fuller discussion of these
earlier theories, see my 'Prices and Production/ London, 1931, p. iiff.
* Cf. 'The high price of bullion' (Essays, Gonner edit., p. 35),
where Ricardo says that 'interest would, during that interval be
under its natural level,' and also Chapter XXVII of his Principles

(McCulloch ed., p. 220), which for a long time have passed almost
unnoticed but which already contained much of what is set out in
later theories.
t Theory and Practice of Banking, 1855 and later editions.

See

particularly vol. ii, pp. 278 et seq.
$ For H. Sidgwick, R. Giffen and J. S. Nicholson, cf. J. W. Angell's
Theory of International Prices-History,

Criticism and

Restatement,

Cambridge, 1926, pp. 117-122.
§ Cf. his evidence before the various Parliamentary Commissions
which is collected in the volume Official Papers by Alfred

Marshall,

London, 1926, especially pp. 38-41, 45, 46 et seq. 273 et seq., as
well as the later account in 'Money, Credit, and Commerce,' pp.
255-56.
|| Especially in Geldzins und Giiterpreise, Jena, 1898, as well
as in the second volume of his later Vorlesungen, already quoted,
which has not had the influence which it deserved, mainly on account
of the exceedingly bad German translation in which it appeared.
I had unfortunately no means of access to the other Swedish works
connected with that of Wicksell, which should certainly not be
overlooked if one is to achieve a complete survey of the development
of this theory.
If Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel, ist edit. 1912, 2nd
IIO

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
whose works trace the development of the effects
on the structure of production of a rate of interest
which alters relatively to the equilibrium rate,
as a result of monetary influences. For the
purpose of this review it is unnecessary to go
back to the earlier representatives of this group;
it is enough to consider the conceptions of Wicksell
and Mises, since both the recent improvements
which have been effected and the errors which
still subsist can be best examined on the basis
of these studies.*
It must be taken for granted that the reader is
acquainted with the works of both Wicksell and
Mises. Wicksell, from the outset,f regards the
problem as concerning explicitly the average
change in the price of goods, which from the
edit. 1924; also the more recent Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunk-

turpolitik, Jena, 1928. [A translation of the former will shortly appear
in the present series. Ed.]
• Professor A. Hahn, whose views regarding trade cycle theory
(put forward in

Volkswirtschaftlichen

Theorie des

Bankkredits,

Tubingen, 1920) are in some respects similar to those of Professor
Mises, cannot be considered here, since we are unable to follow
him in all those points in which he differs from the latter. Similar
theories have also been put forward quite recently by Professor W.
ROpke and S. Budge.
T See e.g. Geldzins und Giiterpreise, p. 125.
Ill

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

theoretical standpoint is quite irrelevant. He
starts from the hypothesis that, in the absence of
disturbing monetary influences, the average pricelevel must remain unchanged. This assumption
is based on another, only incidentally expressed,*
which is not worked out and which, from the
point of view of most of the problems dealt with,
is not even permissible; i.e. the assumption of
a stationary state of the economy. His fundamental thesis is that when the money rate of
interest coincides with the natural rate (i.e. that
rate which exactly balances the demand for loan
capital and the supply of savings)? then money
bears a completely neutral relationship to the price
of goods, and tends neither to raise nor to lower it.
But, owing to the nature of his basic assumptions,
this thesis enables him to show deductively only
that every lag of the money-rate behind the
natural rate must lead to a rise in the general
price-level, and every increase of the money-rate
above the natural rate to a fall in general pricelevel. It is only incidentally, in the course of his
#

Ibid., p. 126.
f Ibid., p. 93 and also Vorlesungen, vol. ii, p. 220.
112

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

analysis of the effects on the price-level of a money
rate of interest differing from the natural rate
that Wicksell touches on the consequences of
such a distortion of the natural price formation
(made possible by elasticity in the volume of
currency) on the development of particular branches
of production; and it is this question which is of
the most decisive importance to Trade Cycle
theory. If one were to make a systematic attempt
to co-ordinate these ideas into an explanation of
the Trade Cycle (dropping, as is essential, the
assumption of the stationary state) a curious
contradiction would arise. On the one hand, we
are told that the price level remains unaltered when
the money-rate of interest is the same as the natural
rate; and, on the other, that the production of
capital goods is, at the same time, kept within the
limits imposed by the supply of real savings. One
need say no more in order to show that there are
cases — certainly all cases of an expanding
economy, which are those most relevant to
Trade Cycle theory — in which the rate of interest
which equilibrates the supply of real savings and
the demand for capital cannot be the rate of interest
H

113

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

which also prevents changes in the price-level.*
In this case, stability of the price-level presupposes changes in the volume of money: but
these changes must always lead to a discrepancy
between the amount of real savings and the
volume of investment. The rate of interest at
which, in an expanding economy, the amount of
new money entering circulation is just sufficient to
keep the price-level stable, is always lower than the
rate which would keep the amount of available
loan-capital equal to the amount simultaneously
saved by the public, and thus, despite the stability
of the price-level, it makes possible a development
leading away from the equilibrium position. But
Wicksell does not recognize here a monetary
influence tending, independently of changes in the
price-level, to break down the equilibrium system
of barter economics: so long as the stability of
the price level is undisturbed, everything appears
to him to be in order.f Obsessed by the notion
that the only aim of monetary theory is to explain
* Similarly also W. Eucken, op. cit. pp. 300 et seq.
f Wicksell's justification of this view in Geldzins und Giiterpreise
(see p. 97) is incomprehensible to me.
114

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

those phenomena which cause the value of money
to alter, he thinks himself justified in neglecting
all deviations of the processes of money-economy
from those of barter-economy, so long as they
throw no direct light on the determination of the
value of money: and thus he shuts the door on
the possibility of a general theory covering all the
consequences of the phenomena which he
indicates .* But although his thesis of a direct
relationship between movements in the price-level
and deviations of the money-rate of interest from
* R. Stucken in his Theorie der Konjunkturschtcankungen (Jena,
1926, p. 26) was one of the first to draw attention to the fact that the
relation, indicated by Wicksell, between a money rate of interest
diverging from the natural rate, and movements in the price-level
only exists in a stationary economy; while, if the flow of goods is
increasing, only an addition to purchasing power can secure stability
in the price-level. He remains, however, entirely steeped in the
prevalent opinion that a stable price-level is indispensable to undisturbed economic development, and therefore holds that the additional
money necessary to secure that condition cannot be regarded as an
element of disturbance in the economic process. Similarly Mr. D. H.
Robertson pointed out at about the same time {Banking Policy and the
Price Level, London, 1926, p. 99) that the rate of interest which
keeps the price-level stable need not coincide with that which equates
the supply of savings with the demand for capital. I am now informed
that, even before the war, this objection formed the basis of a
criticism directed by Prof. David Davidson of Upsala against
Wicksell's theory. Prof. Davidson's article and the subsequent
discussion with Wicksell in the Swedish Economisk Tidskrift are,
however, inaccessible to me.
II

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
its natural level, holds good only in a stationary
state, and is therefore inadequate for an explanation of cyclical fluctuations, his account of the
effects of this deviation on the price structure
and the development of the various branches of
production constitutes the most important basis
for any future monetary Trade Cycle theory.
But this future theory, unlike that of Wicksell,
will have to examine not movements in the general
price-level but rather those deviations of particular
prices from their equilibrium position which were
caused by the monetary factor.

The investigations of Professor Mises represent a big step forward in this direction, although
he still regards the fluctuations in the value of
money as the main object of his explanation,
and deals with the phenomena of disproportionality only in so far as they can be regarded as
consequences — in the widest sense of the term —
of these fluctuations. But Professor Mises' conception of the intrinsic value of money extends the
116

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

notion of 'fluctuations in money value* far beyond
the limits of what this term is commonly understood to mean; and so he is in a position to describe
within the framework, or rather under the name,
of a theory of fluctuations in the value of money,
all monetary influences on price formation.*
His exposition already contains an account of
practically all those effects of a rate of interest
altered through monetary influences, which are
• If one follows C. Menger and now Professor Mises in disregarding
ordinary usage and including in the theory of the value of money all
influences of money on prices, instead of restricting it to an explanation of the general purchasing power of money (by which is understood
the absolute level of money prices as distinct from the relative prices
of particular goods) then it is correct to say that any economic theory of
money must be a theory of the value of money. But this use of the
phrase is hardly opportune, for 'value of money' is usually taken to
mean 'general purchasing power', while monetary theory has by no
means finished its work when it has explained the absolute level of prices
(or, as Wicksell would call it, the 'concrete' level); its far more important
task is to explain those changes in the relative height of particular prices
which are conditioned by the introduction of money. On the other hand,
to avoid any possible misunderstanding we must particularly insist at
this point that in the sense of the famous contrast between such
nominalistic theories as the 'state theory' of Knapp, and the catallactic
theories in general, the monetary theory which we are seeking will
also have to be exclusively a 'theory of money values'. In justice to
Menger and Mises, it should be pointed out that what they mean when
they speak of the stability of the 'inner' value of money, has nothing
to do with any measurable value, in the sense of some price level; but is
only another and, as it seems to me, misleading, expression for what
I now prefer to call neutrality of money. (Cf. my Prices and Produc117

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
important for an explanation of the course of the
Trade Cycle. Thus he describes the disproportionate development of various branches of production and the resulting changes in the income
structure. And yet this presentation of his theory
under the guise of a theory of fluctuation in the
value of money remains dangerous, partly because
it always gives rise to misunderstandings, but
mainly because it seems to bring into the foreground a secondary effect of cyclical fluctuations,
an effect which generally accompanies the latter
but which need not necessarily do so.
This is no place to examine the extent to which
Professor Mises escapes from this difficulty by
using the concept of the inner objective value of
money. For us, the only point of importance is
that the effects of an artificially lowered rate of
interest, pointed out by Wicksell and Mises, exist
tion, pp. 27-28 and passim). This expression, first used by Wicksell
in the passage quoted earlier in the text, has of late become fairly
common in German and Dutch writings on money. Cf. L. v.
Bortkiewicz, Die Frage der Reform unserer Wahrung, Brauns Analen,

vol. vi, 1919, pp. S7-59J W. G. Behrens, Das Geldschopfungsproblem,
Jena, 1928, pp. 228 et seq., 286 and 312; G. M. Verrijin Stuart and
J. G. Koopmans in the reports and discussions of the 1929 meeting
of the 'Vereinigung voor de Staathuishoudkunde en de StatistikV
118

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
whether this same circumstance does or does not
eventually react on the general value of money, in
the sense of its purchasing power. Therefore
they must be dealt with independently if they are
to be properly understood.* Increases in the
volume of circulation, which in an expanding
economy serve to prevent a drop in the pricelevel, present a typical instance of a change in the
monetary factor calculated to cause a discrepancy
between the money and natural rate of interest
without affecting the price-level. These changes
are consequently neglected, as a rule, in dealing
with phenomena of disproportionality; but they
are bound to lead to a distribution of productive
resources between capital-goods and consumptiongoods which differs from the equilibrium distribution, just as those changes in the monetary
factor which do manifest themselves in changes
in the price-level. This case is particularly
important, because under contemporary currency
• Professor Mises recently admitted this, in principle, when he
explicitly emphasized the fact that every new issue of circulating media
brings about a lowering of the money rate of interest in relation
to the natural rate.
P- 57-)

(Geldwertstabtlisierung und
119

Koryunkturpolitik,

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
systems the automatic adjustment of the value of
money, in the form of a flow of precious metals,
will regularly make available new supplies of
purchasing power which will depress the moneyrate of interest below its natural level.*
Since a stable price-level has been regarded as
normal hitherto, far too little investigation has
been made into the effects of these changes in the
volume of money, which necessarily cause a
development different from that which would be
expected on the basis of static theory, and which
lead to the establishment of a structure of production incapable of perpetuating itself once
the change in the monetary factor has ceased to
operate. Economists have overlooked the fact
that the changes in the volume of money, which,
in an expanding economy, are necessary to
maintain price stability, lead to a new state of
affairs foreign to static analysis, so that the
development which occurs under a stable price
level cannot be regarded as consonant with static
* Cf. also my article, 'Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtssystem
der Preise und die Bewegungen des Geldwertes', Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, vol. 28, July 1928.
I2O

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

laws. Thus the disturbances described as resulting
from changes in the value of money form only a
small part of the much wider category of deviations
from the static course of events brought about by
changes in the volume of money — which may often
exist without changes in the value of money, while
they may also fail to accompany changes in value
of money when the latter occur.

vi
As has been briefly indicated above, most
of the objections raised against monetary theories
of cyclical fluctuations rest on the mistaken idea
that their significant contribution consists in
deducing changes in the volume of production
from the movement of prices en bloc. In particular,
the very extensive criticism recently levelled by
Dr. Burchardt and Professor Lowe against monetary Trade Cycle theory is based throughout on
the idea that this theory must start from the wavelike fluctuations of the price-level, which are
conditioned mainly by monetary causes; the rise,
as well as the fall, of the price-level being brought
121

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
about by particular new forces originating on the
side of money. It is only through this special
assumption, which is also stated explicitly, that
Professor Lowe's systematic presentation of his
objections in his latest work* becomes comprehensible; he is completely misleading when he
asserts that, if it is to raise the monetary factor to
the rank of a conditio sine qua non of the Trade
Cycle, monetary theory ought to prove that the
effectiveness of all non-monetary factors depends
on a previous price-boom.f We have already
shown that it is not even necessary, in order to
ascribe the cause of cyclical fluctuations to monetary changes, to assume that these monetary causes
act through changes in the general price-level.
It is therefore impossible to maintain that the
importance of monetary theories lies solely in an
explanation of price cycles.J
But even the essential point in the criticism of
Lowe and Burchardt—the assertion that all monetary theories explain the transition from boom to
• Uber den Elnfluss monetarer Faktoren auf den Konjunkturzyklus,
op. cit. pp. 361-368.
f Op. cit. p. 366.
% As is maintained by Professor Lowe (op. cit., p. 364).
122

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
depression not in terms of monetary causes but
in terms of other causes super-added to the
monetary explanation—rests exclusively on the idea
that only general price changes can be recognized
as monetary effects. But general price changes
are no essential feature of a monetary theory of
the Trade Cycle; they are not only unessential, but
they would be completely irrelevant if only they were
completelylgeneral— that is> if they affected allprices
at the same time and in the same proportion. The
point of real interest to Trade Cycle theory is the
existence of certain deviations in individual pricerelations occurring because changes in the volume
of money appear at certain individual points; deviations, that is, away from the position which is
necessary to maintain the whole system in equilibrium. Every disturbance of the equilibrium of
prices leads necessarily to shifts in the structure of
production, which must therefore be regarded aa
consequences of monetary change, never as
additional separate assumptions. The nature of
the changes in the composition of the existing
stock of goods, which are effected through such
monetary changes, depends of course on the
123

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
point at which the money is injected into the
economic system.
There is no doubt that the emphasis placed on
this phenomenon marks the most important
advance made by monetary science beyond the
elementary truths of the quantity theory. Monetary theory no longer rests content with determining the final reaction of a given monetary
cause on the purchasing power of money, but
attempts instead to trace the successive alterations
in particular prices, which eventually bring about
a change in the whole price system.* The assumption of a 'time lag1 between the successive changes
in various prices has not been spun out of thin air
solely for the purposes of Trade Cycle theory; it
is a correction, based on systematic reasoning, of
the mistaken conceptions of older monetary
theories.*}- Of course, the expression 'time lag,'
* On the development of this point of view, see Chap. I of my
Prices and Production.
f We cannot, therefore, regard Mises' pronouncement at the Zurich
debate of the Verein fiir Sozialpolitik as a surrender of the monetary
standpoint. On this occasion, he not only admitted but indeed
emphasized the fact that monetary causes can only act by producing a
'lag' between various prices, wages and interest rates. (Cf. Verhandlungendes Vereinsfur Sozialpolitik in Zuricht Sch»iften des Vereins, vol.
175, Munich and Leipzig, 1929.)
124

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

borrowed from Anglo-American writers and denoting a temporary lagging behind of the changes
in the price of some goods relatively to the
changes in the price of other goods, is a very
unsuitable expression when the shifts in relative
prices are due to changes in demand which are
themselves conditioned by monetary changes. For
such shifts are bound to continue so long as the
change in demand persists. They disappear only
with the disappearance of the disturbing monetary
factor. They cease when money ceases to
increase or diminish further; not, however,
when the increase or diminution has itself been
wiped out. But, whatever expression we may use
to denote these changes in relative prices and the
changes in the structure of production conditioned
by them, there can be no doubt that they are, in
turn, conditioned by monetary causes, which
alone make them possible.
The only plausible objection to this argument
would be that the shifts in price-relationships
occurring at any point in the economic system
could not possibly cause those typical, regularly
recurring, shifts in the structure of production
125

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

which we observe in cyclical fluctuations. In
opposition to this view, as we shall show in more
detail later, it can be urged that those changes
which are constantly taking place in our money
and credit organization cause a certain price, the
rate of interest, to deviate from the equilibrium
position, and that deviations of this kind necessarily
lead to such changes in the relative position of
the various branches of production as are bound
later to precipitate the crisis.* There is one
important point, however, which must be
emphasized against the above-named critics;
namely, that it is not only when the crisis
is directly occasioned by a new monetary factor,
separate from that which originally brought about
the boom, that it is to be regarded as conditioned
by monetary causes. Once the monetary causes
have brought about that development in the whole
* It is not essential, as Burchardt maintains (op. cit., p. 124) to
base this analysis on any particular theory of interest, such as that
of Bohm-Bawerk; it is equally consonant with all modern interest
theories. The reason why, under the circumstances assumed, interest
fails to equilibrate production for the future and production for the
present, is bound up not with the special form in which interest in
general is explained, but with the deviations, due to monetary causes,
of the current rate of interest from the equilibrium rate,

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

economic system which is known as a boom,
sufficient forces have already been set in motion
to ensure that, sooner or later, when the monetary
influence has ceased to operate, a crisis must occur.
The 'cause' of the crisis is, then, the disequilibrium
of the whole economy occasioned by monetary
changes and maintained through a longer period,
possibly, by a succession of further monetary
changes — a disequilibrium the origin of which can
only be explained by monetary disturbances.
Professor Lowe's most important argument
against the monetary theory of the Trade Cycle —
an argument which so far as most existing
monetary theories are concerned is unquestionably
valid — will be discussed in more detail later. The
sole purpose of the next chapter of this book is
to show that the cycle is not only due to 'mistaken
measures by monopolistic bodies' (as Professor
Lowe assumes),* but that the reason for its
continuous recurrence lies in an 'immanent
necessity of the monetary and credit mechanism.'
• Op. cit., p. 365 et seq.

127

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
VII

Among the phenomena which are fundamentally independent of changes in the value of
money, we must include, first of all, the effects of
a rate of interest lowered by monetary influences,
which must necessarily lead to the excessive
production of capital goods. Wicksell and Mises
both rightly emphasize the decisive importance
of this factor in the explanation of cyclical phenomena, as its effect will occur even when the
increase in circulation is only just sufficient to
prevent a fall in the price level. Besides this,
there exist a number of other phenomena, by
virtue of which a money economy (in the sense
of an economy with a variable money supply)
differs from a static economy, which for this
reason are important for a true understanding
of the course of the Trade Cycle. They have been
partly described already by Mises, but they can
only be clearly observed by taking as the central
subject of investigation not changes in general
prices but the divergences of the relation of
particular prices as compared with the price
128

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
system of static equilibrium. Phenomena of this
sort include the changes in the relation of costs and
selling prices and the consequent fluctuations in
profits, which Professors Mitchell and Lescure
in particular have made the starting point of their
exposition; and the shifts in the distribution of
incomes which Professor Lederer investigates —
both of these phenomena depending for their
explanation on monetary factors,* while neither
of them can be immediately connected with
changes in the general value of money. It is,
perhaps, for this very reason that their authors,
although perfectly realizing the monetary origin
of the phenomena which they described, did not
present their views as monetary theories. While
we cannot attempt here to show the position
which these phenomena would occupy in a systematically developed Trade Cycle theory (a task
which really involves the development of a new
theory, and which is unnecessary for the purposes
of our present argument) it is not difficult to see
#
That Professor Lederer himself sees this clearly is evident from
his analysis, mentioned earlier, contained in the Grundriss der Sozialokonomik, vol. iv, part i, pp. 390-91.

I

129

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
that all of them can be logically deduced from an
initiating monetary disturbance,* which, in any
case, we are compelled to assume in studying
them. The special advantages of the monetary
approach consist precisely in the fact that, by
starting from a monetary disturbance, we are able
to explain deductively all the different peculiarities
observed in the course of the Trade Cycle, and so
to protect ourselves against objections such as were
raised in an earlier chapter against non-monetary
theories. It makes it possible to look upon
empirically recognized interconnections, which
would otherwise rival one another as independent
clues to an explanation, as necessary consequences
of one common cause.
Much theoretical work will have to be done
before such a theoretical system can be worked out
in such detail that all the empirically observed
characteristics of the Trade Cycle can find their
explanation within its framework. Up to now, the
monetary theories have unduly narrowed the field
of phenomena to be explained, by limiting research
* Cf. Mise&' presentation of the social effects of changes in the
value of money: Theorie des Geldes undder Umlaufsnrittel, pp. 178-200.
130

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

to those monetary changes which find their
expression in changes in the general value of
money. Thus they are prevented from showing
the deviations of a money economy from a static
economy in all their multiplicity. The problem of
cyclical fluctuations can only be solved satisfactorily
when a theory of the money economy itself — still
almost entirely lacking at present —has been
evolved, comprising a detailed discussion of all
those points in which it differs from the equilibrium
analysis worked out on the assumption of a pure
barter economy. The full elaboration of this intermediate step of theoretical exposition is indispensable before we can achieve a Trade Cycle theory,
which — as Bohm-Bawerk has expressed it in a
phrase, often quoted but hardly ever taken to
heart — must constitute the last chapter of the
complete theory of social economy.* In my
opinion, the most important step towards such a
theory, which would embrace all new phenomena
arising from the addition of money to the
• This expression occurs in connection with a review of E. v.
Bergmann's Geschichte der Nationaldkonomisthen
Krisentheorien.
(Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Vcrwaltung, vol.
vii, 1898, p. 11 a.)

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
conditions assumed in elementary equilibrium
theory, would be the emancipation of the theory of
money from the restrictions which limit its scope
to a discussion of the value of money.

VIII

Once, however, we have accomplished this
urgently necessary displacement of the problem of
monetary value from its present central position
in monetary theory, we find ourselves in a position
to come to an understanding with the most
important non-monetary theorists of the Trade
Cycle; for the effect of money on the 'real' economic processes will automatically be brought more
to the surface, while monetary theory will no longer
appear to be insisting on the immediate dependence of Trade Cycle phenomena on changes in the
value of money--a claim which is certainly
unjustified. On the other hand, a number of nonmonetary theories do not question in the least the
dependence of the processes which they describe
on certain monetary assumptions; and in their
132

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE
case the only conflict now arising concerns the
systematic presentation of these. It should be the
task of our analysis to show that the placing of the
monetary factor in the centre of the exposition is
necessary in the interest of the unity of the system,
and that the various 'real' interconnections, which,
in certain theories, form the main basis of the
explanation, can only find place in a closed system
as consequences of the original monetary influences. There can hardly be any question, in the
present state of research, as to what should be the
basic idea of a completely developed theory of
money. One can abandon those parts of the
Wicksell-Mises theory which aim at explaining
the movements in the general value of money, and
develop to the full the effects of all discrepancies
between the natural and money rates of interest
on the relative development of the production of
capital goods and consumption goods — a theory
which has already been largely elaborated by
Professor Mises. In this way, one can achieve, by
purely deductive methods, the same picture of the
process of cyclical fluctuations which the more
realistic theories of Spiethoff and Cassel have al-

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
ready deduced from experience. Wicksell himself*
drew attention to the way in which the processes
deduced from his own theory harmonize with the
exposition of Spiethoff; and conversely, Spiethoff,
in a statement already quoted, has emphasized the
fact that the phenomena which he describes are all
conditioned by a change in monetary factors. But
it is only by placing monetary factors first that such
expositions as those of Spiethoff and Cassel can be
incorporated into the general system of theoretical
economics. A final point of decisive importance
is that the choice of the monetary starting point
enables us to deduce simultaneously all the other
phenomena, such as shifts in relative prices and
incomes, which are more empirically determined
and utilized as independent factors; and thus the
relations existing between them can be classified
and their relative position and importance determined within the framework of the theory.
* Vorlesungen, vol. ii, p. 238; Wicksell's review of CasseTs
textbook, which has since appeared in a German translation (Schmollers Jahrbuch fur Volkswirtschaft, Gesetzgebung und Verwaltung,
vol. 52, Munich, 1928), shows that, although he rightly opposes
Cassel's general system, he agrees to a large extent with his theory of
the Trade Cycle.

MONETARY THEORIES OF TRADE CYCLE

Even when these phenomena are, as yet, much
further from a satisfactory explanation than are
the disproportionalities in the development of
production, which are cleared up in a greater
degree, there can be no doubt that it will become
possible to incorporate them also into a selfsufficient theory of the effects of monetary disturbances. These effects, however, although
ultimately caused by monetary factors, do not fall
within the narrower field of monetary theory.
A well-developed theory of the Trade Cycle ought
to deal thoroughly with them; but as this book is
exclusively concerned with the monetary theories
themselves, we shall, in the following chapters,
only study the reasons why these monetary causes
of the Trade Cycle inevitably recur under the
existing system of money and credit organization,
and what are the main problems with which future
research is faced by reason of the realization of the
determining role played by money.

THE FUNDAMENTAL CAUSE
OF CYCLICAL
FLUCTUATIONS

CHAPTER

IV

THE FUNDAMENTAL CAUSE
OF CYCLICAL
FLUCTUATIONS

So far we have not answered, or have only
hinted at an answer to the question why, under the
existing organization of the economic system, we
constantly find those deviations of the money rate
of interest from the equilibrium rate* which, as
we have seen, must be regarded as the cause
of the periodically recurring disproportionalities
in the structure of production. The problem is,
then, to discover the gap in the reaction mechanism
of the modern economic system which is respon• The term 'equilibrium rate of interest' which, I believe, was
introduced into Germany in this connection, by K. Schlesinger in his
Theorie der Geld-und Kreditzvirtschaft (Miinchen and Leipzig,
1914, p. 128) seems to me preferable in this case to the usual expression of 'natural rate* or 'real rate.' Alfred Marshall used the term
'equilibrium level' as early as 1887 (cf. Official Papers of Alfred
Marshall, p. 130). Cf. also chap. v. of the present work.

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

sible for the fact that certain changes of data, so
far from being followed by a prompt readjustment
(i.e. the formation of a new equilibrium) are,
actually, the cause of recurrent shifts in economic
activity which subsequently have to be reversed
before a new equilibrium can be established.
The analysis of the foregoing chapters has
shown that when it is possible to detect, in the
organization of our economy, a dislocation in the
reaction mechanism described by equilibrium
theory, it should be possible (and should, indeed,
be the object of a fully developed Trade Cycle
theory) to describe deductively, as a necessary
effect of the disturbance — quite apart from their
observed occurrence — all the deviations in the
course of economic events conditioned by this
dislocation. It has been shown, in addition, that
the primary cause of cyclical fluctuations must be
sought in changes in the volume of money, which
are undoubtedly always recurring and which, by
their occurrence, always bring about a falsification
of the pricing process, and thus a misdirection of
production. The new element which we are
seeking is, therefore, to be found in the 'elasticity'
140

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

of the volume of money at the disposal of the
economic system. It is this element whose
presence forms the 'necessary and sufficient*
condition for the emergence of the Trade Cycle.*
The question which we now have to examine is
whether this elasticity in the volume of money is an
immanent characteristic of our present money
and credit system; whether, given certain conditions, changes in the volume of money and the
resulting differences between the natural and the
monetary rate of interest must necessarily occur,
or whether they represent, so to speak, casual
phenomena arising from arbitrary interferences
by the authorities responsible for the regulation
* Mr. R. G. Hawtrey regards the following theses as important
for monetary Trade Cycle theories: (i) That certain monetary and
credit movements are necessary and sufficient conditions of the
observed phenomena of the Trade Cycle; and (2) that the periodicity
of those phenomena can be explained by purely monetary tendencies
which cause the movements to take place successively and to be spread
over a considerable period, of years. ('The Monetary Theory of the
Trade Cycle and its Statistical Test': Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 41, p. 472). This entirely correct definition of Mr. Hawtrey's
should have prevented Dr. Burchardt and Prof. Lowe, who expressly
fasten on this point in their criticism of monetary Trade Cycle
theories, from looking from monetary influences to changes in the
general value of money, while disregarding the changes in the distributive process which are conditioned by monetary causes,

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
of the volume of currency media. Is it an inherent
necessity of the existing monetary and credit
system that its reaction to certain changes in data
is different from what we should expect on the
basis of economic equilibrium theory; or are
these discrepancies to be explained by special
assumptions regarding the nature of the monetary
administration, i.e. by a series of what might be
called 'political' assumptions? The question
whether the recurrence of credit cycles is, or is
not, due to an unavoidable characteristic of the
existing economic organization, depends on
whether the existing monetary and credit organization in itself necessitates changes in the currency
media, or whether these are brought about only
by the special interference of external agencies.
The answer to this question will also decide
into which of the most commonly accepted
categories a given Trade Cycle theory is to be
placed. We must deal briefly with this point
because a false classification, which is largely the
fault of the exponents of the monetary
theories, has contributed much to make them
misunderstood.
142

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
II
If we are to understand the present status
of monetary theories of the Trade Cycle, we must
pay special attention to the assumptions upon
which they are based. At the present day, monetary theories are generally regarded as falling
within the class of so-called 'exogenous' theories,
i.e. theories which look for the cause of the cycle
not in the interconnections of economic phenomena themselves but in external interferences.
Now it is, no doubt, often a waste of time to discuss
the merits of classifying a theory in a given category.
But the question of classification becomes important when the inclusion of a theory in one class
or another implies, at the same time, a judgment
as to the sphere of validity of the theory in
question. This is undoubtedly the case with the
distinction, very general to-day, between endogenous and exogenous theories — a distinction introduced into economic literature some twenty
years ago by Bouniatian.* Endogenous theories,
• Studien zur Theorie und Geschichte der Wirtschaftskrisen, Munich,
1908, p- 3-

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCEL
in the course of their proof, avoid making use of
assumptions which cannot either be decided by
purely economic considerations, or regarded as
general characteristics of our economic system —
and hence capable of general proof. Exogenous
theories, on the other hand, are based on concrete
assertions whose correctness has to be proved
separately in each individual case. As compared
with an endogenous theory, which, if logically
sound, can in a sense lay claim to general validity,
an exogenous theory is at some disadvantage,
inasmuch as it has, in each case, to justify the
assumptions on which its conclusions are
based.
Now as far as most contemporary monetary
theories of the cycle are concerned, their opponents
are undoubtedly right in classifying them, as does
Professor Lowe* in his discussion of the theories
of Professors Mises and Hahn, among the exogenous theories; for they begin with arbitrary interferences on the part of the banks. This is, perhaps,
one of the main reasons for the prevailing scepti* Der gegemo&rtige Stand der Konjunkturforschung in Deutschland,
op. tit. p. 349.
144

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

cism concerning the value of such theories. A
theory which has to call upon the deus ex machina*
of a false step by bankers, in order to reach its
conclusions is, perhaps, inevitably suspect. Yet
Professor Mises himself—who is certainly to be
regarded as the most respected and consistent
exponent of the monetary theory of the Trade
Cycle in Germany — has, in his latest work,
afforded ample justification for this view of his
theory by attributing the periodic recurrence
of the Trade Cycle to the general tendency of
Central Banks to depress the money rate of interest
below the natural rate.f Both the protagonists
and the opponents of the Monetary Theory of
the Trade Cycle thus agree in regarding these
explanations as falling ultimately within the
exogenous and not the endogenous group. The
fact that this is not an inherent necessity of the
monetary starting-point is however shown by the
* Cf. Neisser, Der Tauschwert des Geldes, Jena, 1928, p. 16 x.
f While it seems to me that in the analysis of the effects of a money
rate of interest diverging from the natural rate Professor Mises has
made considerable progress as compared with the position adopted
by Wicksell, the latter succeeded better than Mises did in explaining
the origin of this divergence. We shall go into Wicksell's explanation
in somewhat more detail below.
K

I4S

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

undoubtedly endogenous nature of the various
older Trade Cycle theories, such as that of
Wicksell. But since this suffers from other
deficiencies, which have already been indicated,
the question whether the exogenous character of
modern theories is, or is not, an inherent necessity
of their nature remains an open one.* It seems
to me that this classification of monetary Trade
Cycle theory depends exclusively on the fact that a
single, specially striking, case is treated as the
normal; while, in fact, it is quite unnecessary to
adduce interference on the part of the banks in
order to bring about a situation of alternating
boom and crisis. By disregarding those divergencies between the natural and money rate of
interest which arise automatically in the course of
economic development, and by emphasizing those
caused by an artificial lowering of the money rate,
the Monetary Theory of the Trade Cycle deprives
itself of one of its strongest arguments; namely,
the fact that the process which it describes must
• Part of the two following paragraphs repeats word for word my
contribution to the discussion on 'Credit and the Trade Cycle' at the
Zurich Assembly of the 'Verein fur Sozialpolitik,' (cf. Schriften
4e$ Vereins fur Sozialpolitik, vol. 175, p. 370-71).

146

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

always recur under the existing credit organization,
and that it thus represents a tendency inherent
in the economic system, and is in the fullest
sense of the word an endogenous theory.
It is an apparently unimportant difference in
exposition which leads one to this view that the
Monetary Theory can lay claim to an endogenous
position. The situation in which the money rate
of interest is below the natural rate need not,
by any means, originate in a deliberate lowering
of the rate of interest by the banks. The same
effect can be obviously produced by an improvement in the expectations of profit or by a diminution in the rate of saving, which may drive the
* natural rate* (at which the demand for and the
supply of savings are equal) above its previous
level; while the banks refrain from raising their
rate of interest to a proportionate extent, but
continue to lend at the previous rate, and thus
enable a greater demand for loans to be satisfied
than would be possible by the exclusive use of the
available supply of savings. The decisive significance of the case quoted is not, in my view,
due to the fact that it is probably the commonest

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
in practice, but to the fact that it must inevitably
recur under the existing credit organization.

III

The notion that the increase in circulation is due
to arbitrary interference by the banks owes its
origin to the widespread view that Banks of Issue
are the exclusive or predominant agencies which
can change the volume of the circulation; and
that they do so of their own free will. But the
Central Banks are by no means the only factor
capable of bringing about a change in the volume of
circulating media5*; they are, in their turn, largely
dependent upon other factors, although they can
influence or compensate for these to a great extent.
Altogether, there are three elements which regulate
the volume of circulating media within a country
— changes in the volume of cash, caused by
* This fact has already been pointed out by the representatives of
the Banking School, and later by C. Juglar (DM change et de la libertt
d'dmission, Paris, 1868. Chap. Ill, passim; and Des crises commerciales
et leur retour periodique, 2nd edit. Paris, 1889, p. 57). Wicksell (Geldzins
und Guterpreise, p. 101) also points, first of all, to the deposit business
of the banks as the cause of the 'elasticity' of the volume of currency
media.
148

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

inflows and outflows of gold; changes in the note
circulation of the Central Banks: and last, and in
many ways most important, the often-disputed
'creation' of deposits by other banks. The interrelations of these are, naturally, complicated.
As regards original changes in the first two
factors —that is, changes which are not set in
motion by changes in one of the other factors —
there is comparatively little to say. It has already
been pointed out that, in principle, an increase
in the volume of cash, occasioned by an increase
in the volume of trade, also implies a lowering of
the money rate of interest — which gives rise to
shifts in the structure of production which seem,
though only temporarily, to be advantageous.
It must certainly appear very problematical
whether the deviations in the money rate of interest
thus occasioned would, as a rule, be large enough
to cause fluctuations of an empirically ascertainable
magnitude. Central Banks, on the other hand, are
by law or custom bound to preserve such a close
connection between note issues and cash holdings
that we have no reason to assume that they, and
they alone, provide the original impetus. Of
149

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
course, it is possible to assume, with Professor
Mises, that the Central Banks, under the pressure
of an inflationist ideology, are always trying to
expand credit and thus provide the impetus for
a new upward swing of the Trade Cycle; and this
assumption may be correct in many cases. The
credit expansion is then conditioned by special
circumstances, which need not always be present;
and the cyclical fluctuations caused by it are,
therefore, not the necessary consequence of an
inherent tendency of our credit system, for the
removal of the special circumstances would eliminate them. But before deciding in favour of this
special assumption — which requires a proof of
its own, to be given separately in the case of each
cycle — we have to ask whether, in some other part
of our credit system, such extensions may not
take place automatically under certain conditions
— without the necessity for any special assumption
of the inadequate functioning of any part of the
system. To me this certainly appears to be true
as regards the third factor of money expansion —
the 'credit creation* of the commercial banks.
There are few questions upon which scientific
150

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
literature, especially in Germany, is so lacking in
clarity as on the possibility and importance of an
increase in circulating media due to the granting
of additional credits by the banks of deposit.
To give an answer to the question whether creditcreation is a regular consequence of the existing
organization of banking, we shall have to attempt
to clear up our conception of the methods and
extent of such credit creation by deposit banks.
Besides dealing with the fundamental question of
the possibility of credit creation and the limits to
which it can extend, we shall have to discuss two
special questions which are important for our
further investigations: namely, whether the practical importance of credit creation depends upon
certain practices of banking technique, as is often
assumed; and secondly, whether it is, in fact,
possible to determine whether a given issue of
credit represents credit freshly created or not.
If in the course of our investigation, it is possible
to prove that the rate of interest charged by the
banks to their borrowers is not promptly adjusted
to all changes in the economic data (as it would be
if the volume of money in circulation were constant)

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
•—either because the supply of bank credits is,
within certain limits, fundamentally independent
of changes in the supply of savings, or because
the banks have no particular interest in keeping
the supply of bank credit in equilibrium with the
supply of savings and because it is, in any case,
impossible for them to do so — then we shall
have proved that, under the existing credit
organization, monetary fluctuations must inevitably occur and must represent an immanent
feature of our economic system — a feature deserving of the closest examination.
IV

The main reason for the existing confusion
with regard to the creation of deposits is to be
found in the lack of any distinction between the
possibilities open to a single bank and those open
to the banking system as a whole.* This is
* As it is impossible to deal exhaustively with this problem, it must
be sufficient to draw attention to the main literature of the subject.
The first author known to me who definitely stated that 'the balances
in the bank are to be considered in very much the same light with the
paper circulation,' was Henry Thornton (see his evidence before the
Committee on the Bank Restriction, 1797). The development of a
more definite theory of credit creation by the banks began, however,

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

connected with the fact that, in Germany, the
whole theory has been taken over bodily from
England, where, owing to differences in banking
with the criticisms levelled by the Banking School against the Currency
School, and represent the former's only correct contribution to the
science of economics. As Professor T. E. Gregory has recently shown
{Introduction to Tooke and Newmarch's History of Prices, London, 1928,
pp. 11 et seq.) it was James Pennington who originally developed this
thesis, first in an appendix to T. Tooke's Letter to Lord Grenville
on the Effects ascribed to the Resumption of Cash Payments, then in
further contributions to R. Torrens' Letter to the Rt. Hon. Viscount
Melbourne (London, 1837) and finally in an appendix to the third
volume of Tooke's History of Prices (1838). If one wanted to trace
the further progress of this theory during the nineteenth century,
one would have to draw particular attention to the writings of H. D.
Macleod (cf., in particular, his Dictionary of Political Economy,
London 1863, article on Credit), C. F. Dunbar and F. Ferrara.
Modern developments follow the exposition of H. J. Davenport
{The Economics of Enterprise, New York, 1915, pp. 250 et seq.); and

mention should, in particular, be made of C. O. Pnillips'sBan^ Credit,
New York, 1920 (especially Chap. 111, 'The Philosophy of Bank
Credit'), of W. F. Crick {The Genesis of Bank Deposits, 'Economica',
vol. vii, No. 20-June 1927) and R. G. Rodkey {The Banking Process,
New York, 1928). Apart from these, we must include in our list the
well-known works of Hartley Withers, Irving Fisher and R. G. Hawtrey and, in German literature, K. Wicksell {Geldzins und Giiterpreise,
p. 101), A. Weber {Depositenbanken und Spekulationsbanken, 2nd edit.,

1922), the works which we have already mentioned of Mises and Hahn,
G. Haberler's essay on the latter {Hahns Volkawirtschaftliche Theorie
des Bankkredits, Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaften, vol. 57, 1927) and,
finally, H. Neisser {Der Tauschwert des Geldes, Jena, 1928).
The theory has been severely criticized especially by Professor
Carman, W. Leaf, and more recently by R. Reisch {Die 'Deposit* legende in der Banktheoriet Zeitschrift fur Nationalokonomie, vol. i,
1930.)
153

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
technique, the limits imposed on any individual
bank are, perhaps, somewhat less narrow, so that
the general possibilities open to the banking
system as a whole have not been indicated with
the degree of emphasis which their importance
deserves. In Germany, following the popular exposition of Mr. Hartley Withers, the most generally accepted view starts from English banking practice which (except in the case ofloverdrafts') credits
the account of the customer with the amount
borrowed before the latter is actually utilized.
Granted this assumption, the process leading to
an increase of circulating media is comparatively
easy to survey and therefore hardly ever disputed.
So long and in so far as the credits which a bank
is able to grant, considering its cash position,
remain on current account —and in the United
States, for example, it is a regular condition for the
granting of a loan that the current account of the
borrower shall never fall below a certain relatively
high percentage of the sum borrowed* — every
new grant of credit must, of course, bring about
an equivalent increase of deposits and a propor• Cf. C. O. Phillips, op. cit., p. 50.

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
tionately smaller diminution of cash reserves.
Against these 'deduced deposits' (Phillips) which
regularly occur in the normal course of business,
the banks naturally have to keep only a certain
percentage of cash reserve; and thus it is clear
that every bank can, on the basis of a given increase
of deposits resulting from public payments, grant
new credits to an amount exceeding this increase
in deposits.
Against this method of proof it can rightly be
objected that, while banking practices of this kind
may well lead to the possibility of credit creation,
the conditions which this argument assumes are not
present on the Continent. It has been justifiably
and repeatedly emphasized that there is no reason
why the borrower, so long as he is not forced to do
so, should borrow money at a higher rate of
interest merely to leave that money on deposit at
a lower rate.f
If the possibility of creating credit depended
t R. Reisch in 'Die Wirtschaftliche Bedeutung des Kredites im
Lichte von Theorie und Praxis' (Mitteilungen des Verbandes Sster-

reickischen Bankenund Bankiers, ioth year, Nos. 2-3, Vienna, 1928,
p. 38) and A. Johr in his verbal report on Credit and the Cycle, in the
Zurich Assembly of the Verein fiir Sozialpolitik (Schriften, vol. 175,
P- 3 " ) .

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
only on the fact that borrowers leave part of
their loans on current account for a time, then
credit creation would be practically impossible
on the Continent; * while even in England and the
United States it would have only a very secondary
importance. It should be noted that this applies
to the case in which the borrower pays the sum
borrowed into another account in the same bank,
so that it is transferred from one to the other
without diminishing the total volume of deposits
in the bank concerned. We need not, therefore,
go separately into this case.
But, in adopting this line of argument, by far
the most important process by which deposits are
created in the course of current banking business
even in Anglo-Saxon countries is neglected, and
the sole way in which they are created on the
Continent is left entirely out of consideration.
The latter could easily be overlooked, since the
ability of individual banks to make an increase
in their deposits the basis of a far greater amount
* As Bouniatian, evidently for this reason, actually assumes, (cf.
his essay, 'Industrielle Schwankungen, Bankkredit und Warenpreise',
Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaften und Sozialpolitik, vol. 58, Tubingen,
1927, p. 463.)

156

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
of new credit can only be accounted for by means
of the assumptions used above, while in the banking system as a whole the same process occurs
independently. In the following pages, therefore,
we shall examine how an increase in deposits,
paid in in cash, influences the lending capacity
of the whole banking system; starting from the
assumption, more appropriate to Continental
conditions, that the sums granted will be credited
to the account of the borrower only at the time
when, and to the extent that, he makes use of them.

We may start as before by examining the procedure of a single bank. At this bank a certain
amount of cash is newly deposited; a sum, let us
say, equal to 5 per cent of its previous total
deposits. If the policy of the bank was to keep a
reserve of 10 per cent against deposits, that ratio
has now been increased, by the new deposit,
to 14.3 per cent, and the bank is therefore in a
position, in accordance with its policy, to grant new
credits. If we assume further that it re-lends
90 per cent of the newly deposited money and that

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the whole of this is immediately utilized by the
borrower (in order, let us say, to increase his
purchases of raw materials) then the ratio of cash
to deposits has again sunk to 10 per cent. In so
far as the bank does not change its policy its
individual lending capacity is exhausted, in these
circumstances, before it has even re-lent the whole
of the amount newly deposited.
The effect of the sums newly deposited at one
bank on the lending capacity of the whole banking
system is, however, not exhausted by this transaction. If the borrower does not use the credit
in a way which leads quickly to the market for
consumers' goods, such as wage payments, but
devotes it instead to the purchase of raw materials
or half-finished products, then it is to be assumed
that payment will be made by cheque and that the
seller will hand over the sum received to his own
bank for encashment, the amount being credited to
his own account. The next consequence must be
that the clearing-house position of this bank
improves by exactly the amount transferred, and
it therefore obtains an equivalent amount of cash
from the bank which originally granted the credit.
158

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

For the second bank, therefore, the sum originating in the granting of credit and paid into its
accounts (representing, as we remember, 90 per
cent of the original deposit) is just as much an
original deposit, based on cash payments, as it
was to the bank which we originally considered.
It will, therefore, be regarded as a basis for
additional lending and used in just the same way
as any other new deposit. If the second bank also
keeps 10 per cent of its deposits as cash reserves, it
too will be in a position to lend 90 per cent of the new
deposit, and the same process will be continued
as long as the amounts are merely transferred
from bank to bank and are not taken out in cash.
As every bank re-lends 90 per cent of the amount
paid into it and thus causes an equivalent inorease
in deposits for some other bank, the original
deposit will give rise to credits representing
o.9+o.92+o.93-fo.9+
times the original
amount. As the sum of this converging infinite
series is 9, the banks will be enabled, in an
extreme case, to create, against an amount of
cash flowing in from an outside source, credits
equal to nine times that amount. This becomes

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
clear when we consider that the process can only
stop when the last part of this cash is required for
the 10 per cent reserve of the deposits.
For simplicity's sake we have made use of an
assumption which is undoubtedly incorrect, but
which affects our conclusion only in so far as it
reduces the actual amount of new credit which the
banks can create with a reserve ratio of 10 per
cent. Its omission leaves our fundamental conclusion intact; i.e. that they can grant credit to
an amount several times greater than the sum
originally deposited. In fact some part of the
credit at least, if not on the first then on subsequent
occasions, will always be withdrawn in cash and
not deposited with other banks. For example,
if 70 per cent is always redeposited instead of ^be
full 90 per cent this amount being re-lent by
every bank and the remainder being used in cash
transactions, then the increase in deposits will give
rise to additional credits equal to only 0.7+0.7*+
0.73
times (i.e. two and one-third times) the
original. So long as any part of the credits granted
are not withdrawn in cash but redeposited with
the banks, the latter will be able to create addi160

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

tional credits, of a larger or smaller amount, as a
consequence of every increase in their cash holdings.* The lifetime of this pyramid of credit is
limited to that of the first credit granted, save in
the case (which can be assumed as long as there
are no withdrawals from deposits) where it is
immediately replaced by a fresh credit. If,
however, deposits unexpectedly diminish at any
part of the banking system, the process will be
reversed, and the original diminution of deposits
will occasion a contraction of credit correspondingly exceeding the amount withdrawn.f
#

The maximum amount of credit, to the creation of which the
increase in the cash holdings of the banks may give rise under such an
assumption, is easily found by inserting the factor representing the
proportion of the original deposit which is re-lent and redeposited
with another bank into the mathematical formula expressing the
limit which a convergent geometrical series approaches, viz., x=rt
The result gives the total of credits which originate in the series of
transactions, including the original deposit; and, in order to arrive at
the amount of additional credits, i has to be subtracted from the
result. It is thus easily seen that even if, for example, only i-oth of
the 90 per cent re-lent by the first bank, or 10 per cent of the original
deposit, is redeposited with another bank-and this process is
repeated, additional credits amounting to o . m times the original
deposit will be created.
f On this question, and on the interesting effects of a transference
of deposits from one bank to another, cf. the more elaborate treatment
of C. O. Phillips, op. cit, p. 64 seq.; also the remarks of W. F. Crick,
loc. citt p. 196.

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
In this connection we must note for further
emphasis later the fact that the proportion in
which the credits granted are transferred to other
accounts —and not paid out in cash —must be
regarded as subject to very wide fluctuations as
between different individuals at a given moment,
as well as between various periods of time for the
economic system as a whole. We return later to
the significance of this fact.
What has been said above should be sufficient
to show that the possibility of creating credits
over and above the sums deposited — which,
under Continental banking conditions, is not
open to any individual bank — is, however, open
to the whole banking system of the country to a
considerable extent. The fact that a single bank
cannot do what is automatically done by the banking system as a whole also explains another circumstance, which might otherwise easily be cited as a
proof of the impossibility of additional credit
creation. If every bank could re-lend several
times the amount deposited, there would be no
reason against its offering a much higher rate of
interest on deposits than it actually does, or, in
162

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
particular, under the existing discount rates of the
Central Banks, against its procuring cash in
unlimited quantities by way of re-discount; for it
would only have to charge its customers a small
part of the rate of interest charged by the banks
in order to make the business pay. This apparent
contradiction between theory and practice is
cleared up as soon as one realizes that an increase
of deposits by a single bank only offers possibilities
for credit creation to the banking system as a whole.
But the importance of this circumstance transcends
the mere clearing up of this difficulty.
VI

As credits created on the basis of additional
deposits do not normally appear in the accounts
of the same bank which granted the credit, it is
fundamentally impossible to distinguish, in individual cases, between * those deposits which
arose through cash payment and those which
find their origin in credit.'* But this consideration
• Neisser (op. cit.,p. 53) deserves credit for clearing up an untenable
conception, which was quite recently held by no less an authority
than Professor J. Schumpeter (Theorie der toirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, Munich and Leipzig, 2nd edit., 1926, p. 144).

•63

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
rules out, a priori, the possibility of bankers
limiting the amount of credit granted by them to
the amount of 'real' accumulated deposits — that
is, those arising from the accommodation of
temporarily unused money. The same fact enables
us to understand why it is generally just those
economic writers who are also practical bankers
who are most unwilling to admit in any circumstances that they are in a position to create credits.*
'The banker simply does not notice that through
this process there is an increase in the amount of
money in circulation.'f Once the impetus has
been given to any part of the banking system, mere
adherence to the routine of banking technique
will lead to the creation of additional deposits
• Cf., for example, Walter Leaf, the late chairman of the Westminster Bank, in his book Banking (Home University Library,
London, 1926), or the contributions of A. Johr and B. Dernburg to
the Zurich Debate on the Trade Cycle. (Schrtften des Vereines fUr
Sozialpolitik, vol. 175, 1929, pp. 311 and 329). These arguments
were perfectly correctly answered by another 'practical* banker, K.
Schlesinger (ibid., p. 355). Professor A. Hahn, on the other hand, falls
into the opposite error. The standpoint of Professor R. Reisch will be
discussed later.
f Neisser, op. cit., p. 54. He goes on to say, quite correctly, that
'the mere fact that cheque-deposits represent money, without being
covered by cash up to 100 per cent, already explains the money-creating nature of bank credit.'

164

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

without the possibility arising, at any point, of
determining whether any particular credit should
properly be regarded as 'additional.' Every time
money which has been deposited is re-lent —
provided that the depositor is not prevented
from using his deposits for making payments —
this process is to be regarded as the creation of
additional purchasing power; and it is merely
this comparatively simple operation which is at
the root of the banks' ability to create purchasing
power —- although the process appears so mysterious to many people. It is thus by no means
necessary that the banks should grant these
credits, as Dr. Dernburg seems to assume, in an
'improper or wanton* way.
It is of course quite another question whether
bankers can, or do, create additional credits of
their own free will. The objections to this theory
of additional credits, which are levelled against
the statement that the banks create credit 'as
they please', although holding good at a given
rate of interest, do not in the least affect that
part of the theory which we need for our analysis.
If Professor Reisch, for example, emphasizes that
165

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
bank deposits generally increase only * according
to the needs of business/* or if Prof. Bouniatian
objects that 'it does not depend on the banks,
but on the demands made by commerce and
industry, how far banks expand credit/f then these
assertions, coming as they do from opponents
of the theory of bank credits, already contain all
that is needed for a deductive proof of the necessity
for the recurrence of credit cycles. What interests
us is precisely the question whether the banks
are able to satisfy the increased demands of
business men for credits without being obliged
immediately to raise their interest charges —as
would be the case if the supply of savings and the
demand for credits were to be in direct contact,
without the agency of the banks (as for example in
the hypothetical Savings market' of theory); or
whether it is even possible for the banks to raise
their interest charges immediately the demand for
credits increases. Even the bitterest opponents
of this theory of bank credit are forced to admit
that * there can be no doubt that, with the upward
• Op. cit., p. 39.

t Op. cit., p. 465.

166

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
swing of the Trade Cycle, a certain expansion of
bank credits takes place.'*
We must not, however, be satisfied with registering the general agreement of opinion on this
point. Before passing on to analyse the consequences of this phenomenon we must ask whether
the causes which bring it about that banks increase
their deposits through additional credits in periods
of boom and thus postpone, at any rate temporarily,
the rise in the rate of interest which would otherwise necessarily take place, are inherent in the
nature of the system, or not.
v 11

So far, the starting point of our argument
concerning the origin of additional credits has
been the assumption that the banks receive an
increased in-flow of cash which they then use as a
basis for new credits on a much larger scale. We
must now inquire how banks behave when an
increased demand for credit makes itself felt.
* Dernburg, op. cit.t p. 329. He merely adds to this statement the
remark that the banks and the Central Bank should* see to it that this
expansion is 'kept in order'!

167

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
Assuming, as is preferable, that this increased
demand was not caused by a lowering of their own
interest rates, this additional demand is always a
sign that the natural rate of interest has risen —
that is, that a given amount of money can now
find more profitable employment than hitherto.
The reasons for this can be of very different kinds.*
New inventions or discoveries, the opening up of
new markets, or even bad harvests,f the appearance
of entrepreneurs of genius who originate 'new
combinations' (Schumpeter), a fall in wage rates
due to heavy immigration; and the destruction of
great blocks of capital by a natural catastrophe,
or many others. We have already seen that none of
these reasons is in itself sufficient to account
for an excessive increase of investing activity,
which necessarily engenders a subsequent crisis;
but that they can lead to this result only through
the increase in the means of credit which they
inaugurate.
* 'A great variety of causes,' observes R. G. Hawtrey, very
correctly (Trade and Credit, London, 1928, p. 175).
t Regarding the influence of harvests on the Trade Cycle, cf. the
useful compilation of various contradictory theories by V. P. Timoshenko, The Role of Agricultural Fluctuations in The Business Cycle

(Michigan Business Studies, vol. ii, No. 9, 1930).
168

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

But how is it possible for the banks to extend
credit, as they undoubtedly do, following an
increase in demand, when no additional cash is
flowing into their vaults? There is no reason to
assume that the same cause which has led to an
increased demand for credit will also influence
another factor, the cash position of the banks —
which as we know is the only factor determining
the extent to which credit can be granted.* So
long as the banks maintain a constant proportion
between their cash reserves and their deposits it
would be impossible to satisfy the new demand for
credit. The fact that in reality deposits always do
expand relatively to cash reserves, in the course of
the boom, so that the liquidity of the banks is
always impaired in such periods, does not of
course constitute a sufficient starting point for an
argument in which the increase in credits is
* It is of course possible that an improvement in the conditions of
production and profit-making will also indirectly cause an increased
flow of cash to the banks, for a flow of funds for investment, as well
as an increased flow of payments for goods, can be expected from
abroad. But, in the first place, this increased flow of cash can only be
expected in a comparatively late stage of the boom, so that it can
hardly explain the latter's origin; and in the second place, such an
explanation could only be adduced in the case of a single country,
and not for the world economy as a whole, or in a closed system.

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
regarded as the decisive factor determining the
course and extent of the cyclical movement. We
must attempt to understand fully the causes and
nature of this credit expansion and in particular,
its limits.
The key to this problem can only be found in
the fact that the ratio of reserves to deposits does
not represent a constant magnitude, but, as
experience shows, is itself variable. But we shall
achieve a satisfactory solution only by showing
that the reason for this variability in the reserve
is not based on the arbitrary decisions of the
bankers, but is itself conditioned by the general
economic situation. Such an examination of the
causes determining the size of the reserve ratio
desired by the banks is all the more important
since we had no theoretical warrant for our
previous assumption that it always tends to be
constant.
It is best to begin our investigation by considering once again the situation of a single bank, and
asking how the manager will react when the credit
requirements of the customers increase in consequence of an all-round improvement in the
170

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
business situation.* For reasons which will
shortly become clear, we must assume that the
bank under consideration is the first to feel the
new credit-requirements of industry, because,
let us say, its customers are drawn from just those
industries which first feel the effects of the new
recovery. Among the factors which determine
the volume of loans granted by the bank, only one
has changed; whereas previously, at the same rate
of interest and with the same security, no new
borrowers came forward, now, under the same
conditions of borrowing, more loans can be placed.
On the other hand, the cash holdings of the bank
remain unchanged. This does not mean, however,
that the considerations of liquidity which dictate
the amount of loans to be granted will lead to the
same result now as when fresh loans could only
have been placed at a lower rate of interest or with
inferior security than was the case with loans
already granted. In this connection, finally, we
must mention that the sums which we have, for
* The problems with which the manager of a single bank is confronted in deciding the bank's credit policy are very neatly analysed
by Mr. W. F. Crick, op. cit., p. 197, et seq.

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
simplicity's sake, hitherto called cash balances,
and which form the bank's liquid reserve, are by
no means exclusively composed of cash —and
are not even of a constant magnitude, unrelated to
the size of the profits which they make possible.
The danger that, in case of need, the reserves
may have to be replenished by rediscounting bills
through the Central Bank*; or that, in order to
correct an unfavourable clearing-house balance,
day-money may have to be borrowed at a given
rate of interest, is far less abhorrent when it is
possible to extend credits at an undiminished rate
of interest than when such an extension would
involve a lowering of that rate. But even disregarding this possibility and assuming that the bank
recognizes that it can satisfy its eventual need for
cash only at correspondingly higher rates, we can
see that the greater loss of profit entailed by keeping the cash reserve intact will, as a rule, lead the
#
On this point see J. S. Lawrence, 'Borrowed Reserves and Bank
Expansion* (Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. xlii, Cambridge,
Mass., 1928) where Mr. Phillips's exposition, mentioned above, is
extensively criticized; also the rejoinder of Mr. F. A. Bradford,
published under the same title in the next volume (xliii) of the
same journal.

172

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

bank to a policy which involves diminishing the
size of this non-earning asset. Besides this, we
have the consideration that, in the upward phase
of the cycle, the risks of borrowing are less; and
therefore a smaller cash reserve may suffice to
provide the same degree of security. But it is
above all for reasons of competition that the bank
which first feels the effect of an increased demand
for credits cannot afford to reply by putting up its
interest charges; for it would risk losing its best
customers to other banks which had not yet
experienced a similarly increased demand for
credits. There can be little doubt, therefore, that
the bank or banks which are the first to feel the
effects of new credit requirements will be forced
to satisfy these even at the cost of reducing their
liquidity.
V I I I

But once one bank or group of banks has
started the expansion, then all the other banks
receive, as already described, a flow of cash which
at first enables them to expand credit on their own
account without impairing their liquidity. They
173

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
make use of this possibility the more readily since
they, in turn, soon feel the increased demand for
credit. Once the process of expansion has become
general, however, the banks soon realize that, for
the moment at any rate, they can safely modify
their ideas of liquidity. While expansion by a
single bank will soon confront it with a clearinghouse deficit of practically the same magnitude
as the original new credit, a general expansion
carried on at about the same rate by all banks
will give rise to clearing-house claims which,
although larger, mainly compensate one another
and so induce only a relatively unimportant cash
drain. If a bank does not at first keep pace with
the expansion it will, sooner or later, be induced
to do so, since it will continue to receive cash at
the clearing house as long as it does not adjust
itself to the new standard of liquidity.
So long as this process goes on, it is practically
impossible for any single bank, acting alone, to
apply the only control by which the demand for
credit can, in the long run, be successfully kept
within bounds; that is, an increase in its interest
charges. Concerted action in this direction,

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
which for competitive reasons is the only action
possible, will ensue only when the increased cash
requirements of business compel the banks to
protect their cash balances by checking further
credit expansion, or when the Central Bank has
preceded them by raising its discount rate. This,
again, will only happen, as a rule, when the banks
have been induced by the growing drain on their
cash to increase their re-discount. Experience
shows, moreover, that the relation between chequepayments and cash payments alters in favour of
the latter as the boom proceeds, so that an
increased proportion of the cash is finally withdrawn from the banks.*
This phenomenon is easily explained in theory
by the fact that a low rate of interest first raises
the prices of capital goods and only subsequently
those of consumption goods, so that the first
* Cf. the statements contained in the well-known ioth yearly
Report of the Federal Reserve Board, for 1923 (Washington, 1924) p.
25: 'This is the usual sequence - an increase in deposits followed by an
increase in currency. Ordinarily the first effect of an increase in
business activity on the banking position is a growth in loans and
deposits . . . Then comes a time when the increase in business activity
and the fuller employment of labour and increased pay-roll call for
an increase in actual pocket money to support the increased wage
disbursements and the increased volume of purchases in detail.'
X

75

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
increases occur in the kind of payments which are
effected in large blocks.* It may lead to the
consequence that banks are not only prevented
from granting new credits, but even forced to
diminish credits already granted. This fact may
well aggravate the crisis; but it is by no means
necessary in order to bring it about. For this it is
quite enough that the banks should cease to extend
the volume of credit; and sooner or later this must
happen. Only so long as the volume of circulating
media is increasing can the money rate of interest
be kept below the equilibrium rate; once it has
ceased to increase, the money rate must, despite
the increased total volume in circulation, rise
again to its natural level and thus render unprofitable (temporarily, at least) those investments
which were created with the aid of additional
credit.f
#

Neisser {op. cit.t p. 162) doubts this, but his criticism results
from an inadequate grasp of the effects of an unduly low money rate of
interest. But even if he were right on this point, the arguments of
monetary Trade Cycle theory would remain unaffected, since the
latter, as is shown in the text, does not depend on this assumption for
its proof.
t We need not stay to examine the case of a continuous increase in
circulating media, which can only occur under a free paper standard.

176

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

IX

The assertion which forms the starting point of
the Additional Credit Theory of the Trade Cycle',
and whose proof has been attempted in the
preceding pages, has never in fact been seriously
questioned; but hardly any attempts have been
made to follow up all the unpleasant consequences
of the state of affairs it indicates. Yet what is
implied when the beneficial effects of bank credits
are praised but that thanks to the activities of banks
an increased demand for credit is followed by a
greater increase in its supply than would be
warranted by the supply of contemporary saving?
Wherein lie the often praised effects of credit,
if not in the fact that it provides means for enterprises for which no provision could be found if
the choices of the different economic subjects
were strictly followed? By creating additional
credits in response to an increased demand, and
thus opening up new possibilities of improving
and extending production, the banks ensure that
impulses towards expansion of the productive
M

177

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
apparatus shall not be so immediately and insuperably balked by a rise of interest rates as they would
be if progress were limited by the slow increase
in the flow of savings. But this same policy
stultifies the automatic mechanism of adjustment
which keeps the various parts of the system in
equilibrium, and makes possible disproportionate
developments which must, sooner or later, bring
about a reaction.
Elasticity in the credit supply of an economic
system, is not only universally demanded but also
— as the result of an organization of the credit
system which has adapted itself to this requirement — an undeniable fact, whose necessity or
advantages are not discussed here.* But we must
be quite clear on one point. An economic system
with an elastic currency must, in many instances,
react to external influences quite differently from an
economy in which economic forces impinge on goods
in their full force — without any intermediary; and
we musty a priori, expect any process started by an
* Cf. K. Wicksell, Geldzins und Giiterpretse, p. 101, 'The more
elastic is the currency system the longer can a more or less constant
difference persist between the two interest rates and the greater,
therefore, will be the influence of this discrepancy on prices.'

178

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

outside impulse to run an entirely different course in
such an economy from that described by a theory
which only takes into account changes originating
on the side of goods. Once, owing to the disturbing
influence of money, even a single price has been
fixed at a different level from that which it would
have formed in a barter economy, a shift in the
whole structure of production is inevitable; and
this shift, so long as we make use of static theory
and the methods proper to it, can only be explained as an exclusive consequence of the
peculiar influence of money. The immediate
consequence of an adjustment of the volume of
money to the 'requirements' of industry is the
failure of the 'interest brake' to operate as promptly
as it would in an economy operating without
credit. This means, however, that new adjustments are undertaken on a larger scale than can
be completed; a boom is thus made possible, with
the inevitably recurring 'crisis.' The determining
cause of the cyclical fluctuation is, therefore, the
fact that on account of the elasticity of the volume
of currency media the rate of interest demanded by
the banks is not necessarily always equal to the
179

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
equilibrium rate, but is, in the short run, determined
by considerations of banking liquidity*
* In a previous work (Die Wahrungspolitik der Vereinigten
Staaten, op. cit.t p. 260), I have already dealt with the elasticity of
bank credit as the cause of cyclical fluctuations. This view of its
determining importance is now also put forward by Professor F. A.
Fetter in a very interesting essay, 'Interest Theories and Price
Movements' (American Economic Review, vol. xvii, supplement,
March 1927; see especially, pp. 95 et seq.). Prof. Fetter, of course, is
also under the influence of the prevailing dogma which holds that the
existence of a stable price level is sufficient proof of the absence of all
monetary influences. The crucial part of his argument, not having
received the attention which it deserves in recent monetary literature,
is reprinted here:
'The foregoing presents the extreme case of the expansion and
contraction of bank loans in relation to prices, but in principle quite
small changes in the loan policies of banks affecting the volume of com-

mercial loans, discount rates, and percentages of reserves, are of the
same nature. They cause and constitute inflation and deflation of the
exchange medium and of commercial purchasing power, not originating in the amount of standard money but in the elasticity of banking
loan funds. This word "elasticity" has long been used in discussions of
banking policy to designate a quality assumed to be wholly desirable in
bank note issues and customers' credits, but with only vague suggestions

as to what is the need, standard, or means, with reference to which
bank loans should expand and contract.
'Rather, it may be more exact to say, the tacit assumption has been
that the bank loan funds should be elastic in response to the "needs of
business." But"theneeds of business" appears to be nothing but another
name for changes in customers' eagerness for loans; and this eagerness

increases when prices are beginning, or are expected, to rise and often
continues to gather momentum while prices rise and until, because of
vanishing reserve percentages (and other factors), the limit of this
elasticity and also the limit of price increase are in sight. In this
situation the most conservative business operations become intermixed with elements of investment speculation, motivated by the

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
The main question set by this inquiry is thus
answered. A deductive explanation embracing
all the phenomena of the Trade Cycle would
require far-reaching logical investigations entirely
transcending the scope of this work, which aims
merely at an exposition of the monetary basis of
Trade Cycle theory. For the present, we must
content ourselves with a reference to existing
literature on the subject.* In the present work
rise of prices and the hope of profit that will be made possible by a
further rise. Throughout this process the much-esteemed elasticity of
bank funds is the very condition causing, or making possible, the rising
prices which stimulate the so-called "needs of business". Truly a vicious
circle, to be broken only by crisis and collapse when bank loans reach a
limit and prices fall.'
(My italics.)

Further, we should point out the connection between our theory
and a famous thesis of Mr. R. G. Hawtrey. The phrase 'so long as
credit is regulated with reference to reserve proportions, the trade
cycle is bound to recur* (Monetary Reconstruction, 2nd edit.,
London, 1926, p. 135) is undoubtedly correct, though perhaps in a
sense somewhat different from that intended by the author; for a
regulation of this volume of loans exclusively from the point of view
of liquidity can never effect a prompt adjustment of the rates charged
on loans to the changes in the equilibrium rate, and thus cannot
help providing opportunities for the temporary creation of additional
credits as soon as (at a given rate of interest) the demand for credit
surpasses the accumulation of savings; that is, when the natural rate
of interest has risen. See, finally, the remarks of Professor W.
Ropke, Kredit und Konjunktur, op. cit., p. 274.
* Besides Professor Mises' Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel we must mention the last chapter of S. Budge's Griindzuge
der Theoretischen Nationalokonomie (Jena, 1925) and Prof. Strigl's
181

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
we shall only draw a few conclusions which follow
from our previous arguments, some with regard to
practical policy, some with regard to further
scientific research. Before going on to this, however, we shall venture a few remarks on the
question whether the result of our investigations
unequivocally settles the controversy between the
protagonists and opponents of the monetary
Trade Cycle theory in favour of the former.

x
It must be emphasized first and foremost that
there is no necessary reason why the initiating
change, the original disturbance eliciting a cyclical
fluctuation in a stationary economy, should be of
monetary origin. Nor, in practice, is this even
generally the case. The initial change need have
no specific character at all, it may be any one
among a thousand different factors which may at
paper on "Die Produktion unter dem Einfluss einer Kreditexpansion' in vol. 173-ii of the Schriften des Vereins fur Sozialpolitik, concerning Trade Cycle theory and business research
(Munich and Leipzig, 1928), a volume which has been repeatedly
quoted above. Since the above was written, I have tried to carry the
analysis of these phenomena a step further in Prices and Production
(London, 1931).
182

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
any time increase the profitability of any group of
enterprises. For it is not the occurrence of a
* change of data' which is significant, but the fact
that the economic system, instead of reacting to
this change with an immediate 'adjustment*
(Schumpeter) — i.e. the formation of a new
equilibrium — begins a particular movement of
'boom' which contains, within itself, the seeds of
an inevitable reaction. This phenomenon, as we
have seen, should undoubtedly be ascribed to
monetary factors, and in particular to 'additional
credits' which also necessarily determine the
extent and duration of the cyclical fluctuation.
Once this point is agreed upon, it naturally
becomes quite irrelevant whether we label this
explanation of the Trade Cycle as a monetary
theory or not. What is important is to recognize
that it is to monetary causes that we must ascribe
the divergences of the pricing process, during the
Trade Cycle, from the course deduced in static
theory.
From the particular point of view from which
we started, our theory must be regarded most
decisively as a monetary one. As to the incorpor183

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

ation of Trade Cycle theory into the general
framework of static equilibrium theory (for the
clear formulation of which we are indebted to
Professor A. Lowe, one of the strongest opponents
of monetary Trade Cycle theory), we must
maintain, in opposition to his view, not only
that our own theory is undoubtedly a monetary
one but that a theory other than monetary is
hardly conceivable.* It must be conceded that
the monetary theory as we have presented it —
whether one prefers to call it a monetary theory
or not, and whether or not one finds it a
sufficient explanation of the empirically determined
fluctuations-has this definite advantage: it deals
with problems which must, in any case, be dealt
with for they are necessarily given when the central
apparatus of economic analysis is applied to the
explanation of the existing organization of exchange.
Even if we had never noticed cyclical fluctuations,
even if all the actual fluctuations of history were
accepted as the consequences of natural events, a
• Cf. my report: 'Uber den Einfluss monetarer Faktoren auf den
Konjunkturzyklus' {Schriften des Vereins fur Sozialpolitik, vol. 173ii, p . 362 et seq.).
184

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS

consequential analysis of the effects which follow from
the peculiar workings of our existing credit organization would be bound to demonstrate that fluctuations
caused by monetary factors are unavoidable.
It is, of course, an entirely different question
whether these monetary fluctuations would, if
not reinforced by other factors, attain the extent
and duration which we observe in the historical
cycles; or whether in the absence of these supplementary factors they would not be much weaker
and less acute than they actually are. Perhaps the
empirically observed strength of the cyclical
fluctuations is really only due to periodic changes
in external circumstances, such as short-period
variations of climate, or changes in subjective data
(as e.g., the sudden appearance of entrepreneurs
of genius) or perhaps the interval between individual cyclical waves may be due to some natural
law.* Whatever further hypothetical causes are
adduced to explain the empirically observed
course of the fluctuations, there can be no doubt
* From now to the end of the section the exposition follows, in
part word for word, my contribution to the Zurich discussion of the
'Verein fur Sozialpolitik.' {pp. cit., p. 37a et seq.)
185

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
(and this is the important and indispensable
contribution of monetary Trade Cycle theory)
that the modern economic system cannot be
conceived without fluctuations ascribable to monetary influences; and therefore any other factors
which may be found necessary to explain the
empirically observed phenomena will have to be
regarded as causes additional to the monetary
cau$e. In other words, any non-monetary Trade
Cycle theory must superimpose its system of
explanation on that of the monetarily determined
fluctuations; it cannot start simply from the static
system as presented by pure equilibrium theory.
Once this is admitted, however, the question
whether the monetary theory of the Trade Cycle
is correct or not must, at any rate, be presented in a
different form. For if the correctness of the interconnections described by monetary theory is
unquestioned, there still remains the problem
whether it is also sufficient to explain all those
phenomena which are observed empirically in the
course of the Trade Cycle; it may perhaps need
supplementing in order to make it an instrument
suitable to explain the working of the modern
186

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
economic system. It seems to me, however, that
before we can successfully tackle this problem we
ought to know exactly how much of the empirically
observed fluctuations is due to the monetary factor,
which is actually always at work; and therefore we
shall have to work out in the fullest detail the
theory of monetary fluctuations. It is hardly
permissible, methodologically speaking, to go in
search of other causes whose existence we may
conjecture, before ascertaining exactly how far,
and to what extent, the monetary factors are
operative. It is our duty to work out in detail the
necessary consequences of those causes of
disturbance which we know, and to make this
train of thought a definite part our logical system,
before attempting to incorporate any other factors
which may come into play.

XI

The fact, simple and indisputable as it is, that
the Elasticity' of the supply of currency media,
resulting from the existing monetary organization,
offers a sufficient reason for the genesis and
187

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
recurrence of fluctuations in the whole economy
is of the utmost importance — for it implies that no
measure which can be conceived in practice would
be able entirely to suppress these fluctuations.
It follows particularly from the point of view of
the monetary theory of the Trade Cycle, that it
is by no means justifiable to expect the total disappearance of cyclical fluctuations to accompany a
stable price-level — a belief which Professor Lowe*
seems to regard as the necessary consequence of
the Monetary Theory of the Trade Cycle.
Professor Ropke is undoubtedly right when he
emphasizes the fact that 'even if a stable price
level could be successfully imposed on the
capitalist economy the causes making for cyclical
fluctuations would not be removed.*f But to
realize this, as the preceding argument shows,
is by no means 'equivalent to a rejection of a ioo
per cent monetary Trade Cycle theory.'^ On
the contrary, on this view, we must regard Professor Ropke's theory, which coincides in the
*'Uber den Einfluss monetarer Faktoren auf den Konjunkturzyklus.'
op. dt.y p. 369.
f Op. cit., p. 265.

X ^ i d . , p. 278
188

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
more important points with our own,* as itself
constituting such a ioo per cent monetary Trade
Cycle theory.
Once this is realized, we can also see how
nonsensical it is to formulate the question of the
causation of cyclical fluctuations in terms of
* guilt,'and to single out, e.g., the banks as those
'guilty* of causing fluctuations in economic
development.f Nobody has ever asked them to
pursue a policy other than that which, as we have
seen, gives rise to cyclical fluctuations; and it is
not within their power to do away with such
fluctuations, seeing that the latter originate not
from their policy but from the very nature of
the modern organization of credit. So long as we
make use of bank credit as a means of furthering
economic development we shall have to put up
with the resulting trade cycles. They are, in a
sense, the price we pay for a speed of development
exceeding that which people would voluntarily
make possible through their savings, and which
* Cf. especially pp. 274 et seq. of the work mentioned,
t As Prof. S. Budge seems inclined to do (op. cit.t p. 216). His
exposition in other respects largely coincides with ours.
189

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
therefore has to be extorted from them. And even
if it is a mistake — as the recurrence of crises
would demonstrate — to suppose that we can, in
this way, overcome all obstacles standing in the
way of progress, it is at least conceivable that the
non-economic factors of progress, such as technical
and commercial knowledge, are thereby benefited
in a way which we should be reluctant to forgo.
If it were possible, as has been repeatedly
asserted in recent English literature,* to keep the
total amount of bank deposits entirely stable,
that would constitute the only means of getting
rid of cyclical fluctuations. This seems to us
purely Utopian. It would necessitate the complete
abolition of all bank-money-—i.e. notes and
cheques — and the reduction of the banks to the
role of brokers, trading in savings. But even if
we assume the fundamental possibility of this
state of things, it remains very questionable
whether many would wish to put it into effect
if they were clear about its consequences. The
stability of the economic system would be obtained
• Certain statements of Mr. R. G. Hawtrey seem to point to this,
especially op. cit., p. 121.
190

CAUSE OF CYCLICAL FLUCTUATIONS
at the price of curbing economic progress. The
rate of interest would be constantly above the level
maintained under the existing system (for, generally speaking, even in times of depression some
extension of credit takes place)*. The utilization
of new inventions and the 'realization of new
combinations' would be made more difficult,
and thus there would disappear a psychological
incentive towards progress, whose importance
cannot be judged on purely economic grounds.
It is no exaggeration to say that not only would it
be impossible to put such a scheme into practice
in the present state of economic enlightenment of
the public, but even its theoretical justification
would be doubtful.
As regards the practical bearing of our analysis
on the Trade Cycle policy of the banks, all that can
be deduced from it is that bankers will have to
weigh carefully the relative advantages and disadvantages of granting credits on an increasing
• Cf. Professor A. C. Pigou Industrial Fluctuations, 2nd edit., p.
145: 'Banks do not in bad times reduce the amount of new real capital
flowing to business men below what it would have been had there
been no banks, but merely increase it to a smaller extent than they
do in good times.'

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
scale, and to take into account the demand, now
fairly widespread, for the early application of a
check to credit expansion. But the utmost that can
be achieved on these lines is only a mitigation,
never the abolition, of the Trade Cycle. Apart
from this, the only way of minimizing damage
is through a far-reaching adjustment of the
economic system to the recognized existence of
cyclical movements; and for this purpose the
most important condition is an increased insight
into the nature of the Trade Cycle and a knowledge
of its actual phase at any particular moment.*
* In this connection, apart from empirical research, the greatest
consideration should be given to the plea made by O. Morgenstern
(op. cit., p. 123 et seq.) for giving increased publicity to company
developments.

19a

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF
TRADE CYCLE THEORY

CHAPTER

V

U N S E T T L E D P R O B L E M S OF
TRADE CYCLE THEORY

So much has already been said (in Ch. in, 5 4 and
6) about the most important of the outstanding
problems of monetary influences on economic
phenomena, that only a brief supplement is
needed at this point. With regard to the
problems of monetary theory in the narrower
sense I may restrict myself chiefly to what
has been said above, as I hope to publish the
results of a separate investigation concerning this
problem elsewhere.* A few remarks may, however, be ventured merely as a summing-up of
what has already been said, and in doing this we
shall touch on a number of other important
* Cf. Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtssystem der Preise und die

Bewegungen des Geldtuertes, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 1928; and more
especially Prices and Production, London, 1931, where I have
attempted to develop some of the points touched upon in this chapter.

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
problems. The most significant result of our
investigation must be the grasp of the elementary
fact that we have no right to assume that an economic
system with an 'elastic' currency will ever exhibit
those movements which can be immediately deduced
from the propositions of static theory. On the
contrary, it is to be expected that movements will
arise which would not be possible under the
conditions usually assumed by that theory. It is
particularly important to realize that this proposition is true whether the changes in the volume
of money also effect changes in the so-called
* general value of money* or not. With the disappearance of the idea that money can only
exert an active influence on economic movement
when the value of money (as measured by one
kind of price level) is changing, the theory that the
general value of money is the sole object of
explanation for monetary theory must fall to the
ground. Its place must, henceforth, be taken by
an analysis of all the effects of money on the course
of economic development. All changes in the
volume of effective monetary circulation, and
only such changes, will therefore rank for con196

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
sideration as changes in economic data capable
of originating 'monetary influences'.
The next task of monetary theory is, therefore, a
systematic investigation of the effects of changes
in the volume of money. In the course of this
approach, relationships will inevitably be contemplated which do not have the permanence of
the equilibrium relationships. All these results,
however (and this must be emphasized to prevent
misunderstanding) will be reached by the aid of
the methods of static analysis, for these are the
only instruments available to economic theory.
The only difference is that these methods will be
applied to an entirely new set of circumstances
which have never, up till now, received the attention they deserve. It is vitally necessary that such
an investigation should keep clear of the notion
that the adjustment of the supply of money to
changes in 'money requirements' is an essential
condition for the smooth working of the equilibrating process of the system, as presented in equilibrium theory.* It must always start from the
• This notion rests on a confusion between the demand for money
and the demand for cash, i.e. that portion of the total amount of money
197

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
assumption that the natural determining factors
will exert their full effect only when the effective
volume of money remains unchanged, whatever
may be the actual changes in the extent of economic activity.
Precise propositions as to the effects of changes
in the volume of money can be laid down only
when accurate information is available both as
to the genesis of the change and the part of the
economic system where it took place. For this
reason little can be said about changes resulting
from the decumulation of hoarded treasure or the
discovery of new gold deposits. The way in
which an individual will elect to spend money
coming to him as a gift or as a result of other noneconomic motives cannot be determined from
deductive considerations. Similarly, little can be
said a priori about bank credits granted to the
State, so long as we have no information as to how
they are to be used. The situation is different,
which at any given moment is utilized in cash, and which undergoes
sharp seasonal fluctuations. This phenomenon, however, is itself a
consequence of the use of bank credit. For a somewhat more detailed
discussion of these problems, cf. Lecture IV, of Prices and Production.
198

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
however, when we are dealing with productive
credits granted by the banks to industry — which
constitute the most frequent form of increase in the
volume of circulating media. These credits are only
given when and where their utilization is profitable,
or at least appears to be so. Profitability is determined, however, by the ratio of the interest paid on
these credits to the profits earned by their use. So
long as the amount of credit obtainable at any given
rate of interest is limited, competition will ensure
that only the most profitable employments are
financed out of a given amount of credit. The uses
to which the additional money can be put are thus
determined by the rate of interest, and the amount
which can be said about those uses will therefore
depend, in turn, on how much is known about the
importance and the effects of interest. Whatever
may have been written or thought on this old
problem of theoretical economics, it is undeniable
that those particular aspects of interest theory
which are important for our analysis have so
far received less attention and even less recogni t i o n than is their due. It is not practicable
to work out, within the limits of this essay,
199

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the supplementary analysis which seems to me
to be necessary in this field; but I should like, at
least, to indicate, before I conclude, some angles
of approach which appear to have been unduly
neglected hitherto. Needless to say, the sections
which follow have even less claim than their
predecessors to be regarded as comprehensive.
11

In the economic system of to-day, interest
does not exist in the form in which it is presented by
pure economic theory. Not only do we find,
instead of one uniform rate, a great number of
differing rates, but, beyond this, none of the
various rates of interest existing is entitled to
rank as the rate of interest described by static
theory, on which all other rates depend, differing
only to the extent to which they are affected by
special circumstances. The process of interest
fixation, which is at the basis of pure theory,
never in fact follows the same course in a modern
credit economy; for in such an economy the supply
of, and the demand for, savings never directly
confront each other.
200

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
All existing theories of interest, with a few not
very successful exceptions, restrict themselves
to the explanation of that imaginary rate of interest which would result from such an immediate
confronting of supply and demand. The fact
that the rate of interest which these theories
explain is one never found in practice does not
mean that they are of no importance, or even
that any explanation of the actual rates can afford
to ignore them. On the contrary, an adequate
explanation of that 'natural rate' is the indispensable starting point for any realization of the
conditions necessary to the achievement of equilibrium, and for an understanding of the effects
which every rate of interest actually in force
exerts on the economic system. It is true that
it does not suffice to explain all empirically observed
rates since it takes into consideration only one
of the factors determining those rates (though
that factor is of course, the one which is always
operative); but any consideration of ruling interest
rates which did not relate its analysis to that of
the imaginary interest rate of static theory would
hang entirely in the air. For the most part,
201

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
however, no solution has been found to the wider
problem of building up on the basis of the theory
of an equilibrium rate of interest, which can be
deduced from the credit-less economy, the structure of different rates which can be simultaneously observed in a modern economy. The solution of this particular problem should provide
a most valuable contribution to a deeper insight
into cyclical fluctuations.
But before we set out to explore on the one
hand the difference between the natural rate of
interest and the actual rate, and on the other
hand that between the various kinds of the latter,
we must say something about the importance of
changes in the equilibrium rate itself, since some
very confused ideas prevail as to the function
of the equilibrium rate of interest in a dynamic
economy. This is not very surprising since, as
we have seen above, an insufficient appreciation
of the role of interest is the cause of most misunderstanding in Trade Cycle theory. Perhaps it is
not too much to say that the importance which
an economist attaches to interest as a regulator
of economic development is the best criterion of
202

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
his theoretical insight. It is therefore all the more
regrettable that recent economic literature has
been quite fruitless so far as the theory of interest
is concerned.* This too is, perhaps, due in part
to the fact that the earlier economists, to whom
we owe our present knowledge of interest theory,
stopped short in their investigations and never
came to the point of explaining the actual rates.

111

Under the rubric of pure interest theory (by
which we understand the explanation of that rate
of interest which is not modified by monetary
influences, although paid, of course, on capital
reckoned in money terms) we shall have to deal
briefly with the question of the effect of transitory
fluctuations in the natural rate of interest, conditioned by 'real' factors. This question is of great
* The best confirmation of this view is given by Mr. G. Heinze,
who, in his recent study, Static or Dynamic Interest Theory (Leipzig,
1928), conies to the correct conclusion that 'In spite of all the partly
justified criticism which was levelled against the interest theory of
Bohm-Bawerk, the latter still represents the most logically perfect
economic explanation of the phenomenon of interest, and is, moreover
the one which comes nearest to the observed facts' (p. 165).
203

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

importance, taking as it does a decisive place in
some of the best known Trade Cycle theories of our
day. In particular Professor Cassel's view (mentioned above, p. 80) that the real cause of cyclical
fluctuations lies in an over-estimate of the supply
of new capital, is based on the assumption that a
temporary fall in the rate of interest conditioned
by real causes can bring about over-investment
in the same way as a rate of interest artificially
lowered by monetary factors. This view, which
seems to be supported by a considerable body of
experts, has to be judged quite differently according as the changes which elicit fluctuations in the
rate of interest originate on the demand or the
supply side. Fluctuations caused by changes on
the demand side, which Professor Cassel uses as
an explanation in his trade cycle theory, certainly
cannot be regarded as an adequate explanation
of the cycle; for, as Professor Amonn has already
pointed out,* this is no reason why enterpreneurs
* CasseVs System

der

Theorettschen Nationalokonomie

(Archiv

fur Sozialwissenschaften und Sozialpolitik, vol. 51, Tubingen
1924, p. 348 et seq.) In order to remain within the scope of our work
we have to forgo the very alluring task of criticizing Professor Cassel's
argument. Such a criticism would also have to deal with the very
204

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY

should (assuming an unchanged rate of interest)
expect to obtain more credits in the future than
they can now. However there can be no doubt
that violent fluctuations in savings and the
consequent temporary changes in the equilibrium
rate of interest act similarly to an artificial lowering
of the money rate of interest in causing an extension of capital investments which cannot be
maintained later owing to the diminished supply
of savings.* In this case, therefore, it is permissible
to speak of non-monetary cyclical fluctuations.
This differs, however, from the conception of
cyclical fluctuations employed hitherto, in that
the passage from boom into depression is not a
necessary consequence of the boom itself, but is
conditioned by 'external circumstances'. A downward turn of this sort can occur just as well in a
ingenious theoretical interpretation of this argument by Dr. G. Halm
(Das Zinsproblem am Geld- und Kapitalmarkt, Jakrbucher fttr
Nationalokonomie und Statistik, 3rd series, vol. 70, Jena, 1926, p.
16 et seq.) Here we may only point out that in this study Halm is
driven to make use of the old hypothesis that savings accumulate
for a time and are then suddenly utilized 'at the moment when the
real boom begins' (p. 21).
*Cf. Dr. A. Lampe, Zur Theorie des Sparprozesses und der
KrediUchfipfung (Jena, 1926, p. 67 seq.)
205

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

hitherto stationary economy or during a depression
as at the end of a boom; and it should therefore
be regarded less as an example of a cyclical
movement than as a particularly complicated
case of the direct process of adjustment to changes
in data. In any case, for reasons given above,
such an explanation, as compared with an endogenous theory, would only come into play when
the latter had proved insufficient to explain a given
concrete phenomenon.
But there can be no doubt that such fluctuations
in the natural rate, conditioned by changes in
the rate of saving activity, present some very important problems in interest theory, the solution
of which would be an important aid in estimating
the effect of fluctuations conditioned by monetary
changes. We have entirely disregarded the circumstances determining the supply of savings
and the fluctuations in this supply; and the
examination of these is a promising field for future
research. It might even be possible to show
that fluctuations in saving activity are a necessary concomitant of economic progress, and thus
to give a firm basis to the theories which we
206

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
have mentioned. This is, perhaps, not very
probable.
In direct relation to the above problem stands
the question of the effects of alterations in the
rate of interest on the price system as a whole.
An examination of this subject should throw light
on the point of view, emphasized by Professor
Fetter,*5 that the height of interest rate, at any
given moment expresses itself in the whole
structure of price relationships, while every
change in that rate must part passu bring about
changes in the relation between particular prices
and thus in the quantitative relationships of the
whole economy.
But here we must content ourselves with
drawing attention to the problems arising out
of the changes in the natural rate of interest,
without contributing further to their solution.
We shall only venture a further remark on a question concerning not the consequences but the
causes of these changes, since this is important
in what follows. This is the question whether
* Op. cit., especially, p. 78. Cf. also, Lecture III, of Prices and
Production.
207

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the rate of interest at any moment depends on
the total amount of capital existing at that moment
or only on the amount of free capital available for
new investment.* We mention this here only in
order to emphasize the untenability of the widespread view that the determining factor, on the
supply side, is the whole existing stock of capital.
If that were so it would hardly be possible to
explain any large fluctuations of the rate of
interest, since the relative changes which the
existing capital stock undergoes within brief
periods and under normal circumstances is insignificant. A thorough investigation of the interconnections in this field must show that the actual
rate of interest depends (apart from the demand
for loan capital) only on the supply of newly
produced or reproduced capital. The existing
stock of fixed capital affects only the demand
side, by determining the yields to be expected
from new investments. This explains how, in a
country which is well equipped with fixed capital,
•'Capital disposable for investment' was the phrase usually
employed by the classical writers to distinguish this free capital
from the stock of real capital. Cf., e.g., J. S. Mill, Essays on some
unsettled questions of Political Economy, London, 1844, pp. 113 ff.
2O8

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
the rate of interest can temporarily rise higher
than that obtainable in a country which is poorly
equipped, provided that there is relatively more
free capital available for new investment in the
latter than in the former. This fact has some
significance in connection with the phenomenon
of enforced saving with which we shall deal later.
iv
As regards the relationship of the natural
or equilibrium rate of interest to the actual rate,
it should be noted, in the first place, that even
the existence of this distinction is questioned.
The objections, however, mainly arise from a
misunderstanding which occurred because K.
Wicksell, who originated the distinction, made use
in his later works of the term 'real rate' (which
to my mind is less suitable than 'natural rate') and
this expression became more widespread than
that which we have used.* The expression 'real
rate of interest' is also unsuitable, since it coincides
• Cf. the works of Professor Ropke and Dr. Burchardt, mentioned
above; also £. Egner, Zur Lehre vom Zwangsparen, 1928, p. 537.
Occasionally {Geldzins und Guterpreise, p. i n ) Wicksell also uses the
expression 'normal rate*.
o

209

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
with Professor Fisher's 'real interest',* which, as
is well known, denotes the actual rate plus the
rate of appreciation or minus the rate of depreciation of money, and is thus in accordance with
common usage, which employs the term 'real
wages' or 'real income' in the same sense. Unfortunately Wicksell's change in terminology is
also linked up with a certain ambiguity in
his definition of the 'natural rate'. Having
correctly defined it once as 'that rate at which the
demand for loan capital just equals the supply
of savings'f he redefines it, on another occasion,
as that rate which would rule 'if there were no
money transactions and real capital were lent in
natura\% If this last definition were correct, Dr.
G. Halm§ would be right in raising, against the
conception of a 'natural rate', the objection that
a uniform rate of interest could develop only in
a money economy, so that the whole analysis is
• Cf. especially Appreciation and Interest (Publications of the
American Economic Association, 3rd series, vol. xi, No. 4, New
York, 1896).
f Vorlesungen, vol. ii, p. 220.
X Geldzins und Gtiterpreise, p. 93.

§ Op. cit., p. 7, footnote.
210

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY

irrelevant. If Dr. Halm, instead of clinging to
this unfortunate formula, had based his reasoning
on the correct definition which is also to be found
in Wicksell, he would have reached the same conclusion as Professor Adolf Weber—the distinguished
head of the school of which he is a member; that
is, that the natural rate is a conception 'which is
evolved automatically from any clear study of
economic interconnections'.* In accordance with
this view, Wicksell's conception must be credited
with fundamental significance in the study of
monetary influences on the economic system;
especially if one realizes the practical importance
of a money rate of interest depressed below the
natural rate by a constantly increasing volume of
circulating media. Unfortunately, although Wicksell's solution cannot be regarded as adequate at
all points, the attention which it has received
since he propounded it has borne no relation to
its importance. Apart from the works of Professor
Mises, mentioned above, the theory has made no
progress at all, although many questions concern* Depositenbanken und Spekulationsbanken, 3rd edit., 1922, p. 171.
211

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
ing it still await solution.* This may be due to the
fact (on which we have touched already) that the
problem had become entangled with that of
fluctuations in the general price level. We have
already stated our views on this point, (p. 196)
and indicated what is necessary for the further
development of the theory. Here, we shall try
to restate the problem in its correct form, freed
from any reference to movements in the price
level.

Every given structure of production, i.e.
every given allocation of goods as between
different branches and stages of production,
requires a certain definite relationship between
the prices of the finished products and those of the
means of production. In a state of equilibrium,
• Another attempt to develop Wicksell's theory — of which I have
learnt only since the above was written — was made, at roughly the
time when Mises' work was published, by Prof. M. Fanno of Padua
in a work entitled Le banche e il mercato monetario, Rome 1912. An
abridged restatement of Prof. Fanno's theory will shortly appear, in
German, in a volume of essays on monetary theory by a number of
Dutch, Italian and Swedish authors, edited by the author of the
present essay.
212

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
the difference necessarily existing between these
two sets of prices must correspond to the rate of
interest, and at this rate, just as much must be
saved from current consumption and made available for investment as is necessary for the maintenance of that structure of production. The
latter condition necessarily follows from the fulfilment of the former, since the prices paid for the
means of production, plus interest, can only
correspond to the prices of the resulting products
when, at the given prices and rate of interest,
the supply of producers' goods is exactly adequate
to maintain production on the existing scale.
The price margins between means of production
and products, therefore, can only remain constant
and in correspondence with the rate of interest
so long as the proportion of current income, which
at the given rate of interest is not consumed but
reinvested in production, remains exactly equal
to the necessary capital required to carry on
production. Every change in this proportion
must begin by impairing the correspondence of
price margins and the interest rate; for it influences
both in opposite directions, and so leads to further
213

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE

shifts in the whole structure of production,
representing an adjustment to altered pricerelationships. These resulting changes in the
structure of production will not always be the
same; they will vary according to whether the
change in the proportions of the social income
going respectively to consumption goods and
investment goods corresponds to real changes in
the decisions of individuals as to spending and
saving, or whether it was brought about artificially,
without any corresponding changes in individual
saving activity.
Apart from individual saving activity (which
includes, of course the savings of corporations,
of the State and of other bodies entitled to raise
compulsory contributions) the proportions between consumption and capital creation can only
change as a result of alterations in the effective
quantity of money.* When changes in the division
of the total social dividend, in favour of capital
creation, result from changes in the saving activity
of individuals, they are self-perpetuating. This
• Very instructive investigations of the problems considered here
were carried out by A. Lampe: Zur Theorie des Sparprozesses und
der Kreditschdpfung, Jena, 1926.
214

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
is not true of such variations between 'consumption
and accumulation* (if we may use for once the
terminology of Marxian literature) as are due to
additional credits granted to the entrepreneurs;
these can be assumed to persist only so long as
the proportion is kept artificially high by a progressively increasing rate of credit creation. Such
an injection of money into circulation acts only
temporarily — until the additional money becomes
income. At that moment, the proportion of capital
creation must relapse to the level of voluntary
saving activity, unless new credits are granted
bearing the same relation to the new total of
money incomes as the first injection bore to the
former total.*
* The argument presented in the text (and put in this form for
brevity's sake) is imperfect in two respects. Firstly, the flow of
voluntary saving can itself vary as a result of a single change in the
proportion of capital formation. This factor, however, is unlikely to
become important enough for its omission to affect the exposition
given in the text. Secondly, the way in which the additional money,
which was given in the first instance to entrepreneurs and used by
them to lengthen the period of production, will always swell incomes
in the long run, needs further elaboration. As a general proposition,
however, it is obvious that whoever uses the additional credits to
make additional investment goods can do so only by employing
additional factors of production; and therefore, since there is in our
case no compensating decrease in the demand for factors elsewhere,
the total incomes of the factors must increase.
215

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
It is clear that such a process of progressive
increase in the supply of money cannot be maintained under our existing credit system, especially
since, as it proceeds, more extensive use will be
made of cash. On the other hand, a mere cessation
of further increases — not, therefore, a reversal
of credit policy, towards deflation —is sufficient
to bring back the proportion of total income
available for capital formation to the extent of
voluntary savings.
The differences in the effects of these two kinds
of variation between consumption and capital
formation manifest themselves first of all on the
price system, and thus on the natural or equilibrium
rate of interest. The first effect of a diminution
of the rate on loans arising from increased saving
activity — so long as the structure of production
remains unchanged — is to bring that rate below
the margin between the prices of means of production and of products. The increased saving
activity, however, must soon cause on the one
hand a falling off in the demand for consumption
goods, and hence a tendency for their prices to
fall (a tendency which may merely find expression
216

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
in decreasing sales at existing prices) and,
on the other hand, an increase in the demand for
investment goods and thus a rise in their prices.
The extension of production will have a further
depressing effect on the prices of consumption
goods, as the new products come on the market,
until, finally, the difference between the respective
prices has shrunk to a magnitude corresponding
to the new, lower, interest rate. If, however, the
fall in the rate of interest is due to an increase in
the circulating media, it can never lead to a corresponding diminution in the price margin, or to
a readjustment of the two sets of prices to the
level of an equilibrium rate of interest which
will endure. In this case, moreover, the increased
demand for investment goods will bring about a
net increase in the demand for consumption
goods; and therefore the price margin cannot be
narrowed more than is permitted by the time-lag
in the rise of consumption goods prices — a lag
existing only as long as the process of inflation
continues. As soon as the cessation of credit
inflation puts a stop to the rise in the prices of
investment goods, the difference between these
217

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
and the prices of consumption goods will increase
again, not only to its previous level but beyond,
since, in the course of inflation, the structure of
production has been so shifted that in comparison
with the division of the social income between
expenditure and saving the supply of consumption
goods will be relatively less, and that of production
goods relatively greater, than before the inflation
began.*
VI

There have recently been increasingly frequent objections to this account of the effects of
an increased volume of currency, and the artificial
lowering of interest rates conditioned by it, on the
grounds that it disregards certain supposedly
beneficial effects which are closely connected with
this phenomenon. What the objectors have in
mind is the phenomenon of so-called 'forced
saving' which has received great attention in
recent literature.f This phenomenon, we are
• Cf. my article on The *Paradox' of Saving, 'Economical No. 32,
p. 160.
f Besides Leon Walras - the originator of this theory (Cf. his
Etudes

d'economic

politique

appliquee
218

1898,

pp.

348-356),

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY

to understand, consists in an increase in capital
creation at the cost of consumption, through the
granting of additional credit, without voluntary
action on the part of the individuals who forgo
consumption, and without their deriving any
immediate benefit. According to the usual presentation of the theory of forced saving, this
occurs through a fall in the general value of money ,
which diminishes the consumers' purchasing
power; the volume of goods thus freed can be used
by the producers who obtained additional credits.
We must, however, raise the same objection ta
this theory which we raised against the usual
account of the effects of an artificial lowering of
the money rate of interest, i.e. that, in principle,,
forced saving takes place whenever the volume
of money is increased, and does not need to
Wicksell and the well-known works of Professors Mises
and Schumpeter, one must mention the recent works of Professor Ropke, Dr. Egner, and Dr. Neisser; and in Anglo-Saxon literature, Mr. D. H. Robertson's Banking Policy and the

Price

Level

(London, 1926). As I have pointed out, however, in Lecture I of Prices
and Production and - at somewhat greater length - in A Note on the
Development of the Theory of Forced Saving, in the Quarterly Journal

of Economics,.November, 1932, the concept of'forced saving' was already
known to J. Bentham, H. Thornton, T. R. Malthus and a number of
other writers in the early 19th century, down to J. S. Mill.
219

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
manifest itself in changes in the value of
money.*
The 'depreciation' of money in the hands of
the consumer can be, and frequently will be, only
relative, in the sense that those diminutions in
price which would otherwise have occurred are
prevented from occurring. Even this causes a
part of the social dividend to be distributed to
individuals who have not acquired legitimate
claim to it through previous services, nor taken
them over from others legitimately entitled to
them. It is thus taken away from this part of the
community against its will. After what has been
said above, this process needs no further illumination.
Nor do we need to adduce further proof that every
grant of additional credit induces 'forced saving*
— even if we have avoided using this rather
unfortunate expression in the course of our argument. There is only one further point — the effect
of this artificially induced capital accumulation —
on which a few remarks should be added. It has
• Cf. D. H. Robertson, Money, 2nd edit., p. 99; and A. C. Pigou,
Industrial Fluctuations, 2nd edit., 1929, pp. 251-257.
220

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
often been argued that the forced saving arising
from an artificially lowered interest rate would
improve the capital supply of the economy to such
an extent that the natural rate of interest would
have to fall finally to the level of the money rate
of interest, and thus a new state of equilibrium
would be created —that is, the crisis could be
avoided altogether. This view is closely connected
with the thesis, which we have already rejected,
that the level of the natural rate of interest depends
directly upon the whole existing stock of real
capital. Forced saving increases only the existing
stock of real capital goods, but not necessarily the
current supply of free capital disposable for investment — that portion of total income which is
not consumed but used as a provision for the
upkeep and depreciation of fixed plant. But any
addition to the supply of free capital available
for new investment or reinvestment must come
from those of the investments induced by forced
savings which already yield a return; a return
large enough to leave over, after providing for
supplementary costs connected with the new
means of production, a surplus for depreciation
221

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
and for interest payments on the capital. If the
capital supply from this source is to lower the
natural rate of interest, it must not, of course,
be offset by a diminution elsewhere — resulting
from the decline of other undertakings confronted
with the reinforced competition of those newly
supplied with capital.
The assumption that an artificial increase of
fixed capital (i.e. one caused by additional credits)
tends to diminish the natural rate of interest in
the same way as one effected through voluntary
savings activity presupposes, therefore, that the
new capital must be incorporated into the economic system in such a way that the prices of the
products imputed to it shall cover interest and
depreciation. Now a given stock of capital goods
is not a factor which will maintain and renew
itself automatically, irrespective of whether it is
in accordance with the current supply of savings or
not. The fact that investments have been undertaken which cannot be 'undone* offers no guarantee
whatever that this is the case. Whether capital can
be created beyond the limits set by voluntary saving
depends — and this is just as true for its renewal
222

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
as for the creation of new plant — on whether the
process of credit creation continues in a steadily
increasing ratio. If the new processes of production are to be completed, and if those already in
existence are to continue in employment, it is
essential that additional credits should be continually injected at a rate which increases fast enough
to keep ahead, by a constant proportion, of the expanding purchasing power of the consumer. If a
new process of roundabout production can be completed while these conditions still hold good, it
can contribute temporarily to a lowering of the
natural rate of interest; but this provides no final
solution of the difficulty.
For, eventually, a moment must inevitably
arrive when the banks are unable any longer to
keep up the rate of inflation required, and at
that moment there must always be some processes
of production, newly undertaken and not yet
completed,* which were only ventured because
* The existence of new long processes, which have not yet been
completed, is not a necessary condition in order that the relative
increase in the demand for consumers' goods may lead to the abandonment of such processes and, therefore, to the destruction of parirof the
capital employed there; but it is the case which will always be given in
22 3

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
the rate of interest was kept artificially low. It
does not follow, of course, that these processes in
particular will be left unfinished because of the
subsequent rise in that rate; on the other hand,
their existence does cause the rate of interest to
be higher than it would be in their absence, when
capital would be required only by processes made
possible by voluntary saving without any competing
demand arising from processes which were only
enabled to start by 'forced saving.' The capital
invested in new and not yet completed processes
of production will thus merely intensify the demand
for further supplies by calling for the capital
necessary to complete them — an effect which
will be the more pronounced the greater the
practice and where this effect is most easily seen. In this connection
it should, however, be noted that the introduction of a longer roundabout process of production will, in almost all cases, affect not only
a single enterprise but a series of enterprises representing successive
stages of production. Even a completed plant may, in this sense,
represent part of an incomplete process—if the capital is lacking
which would have to be invested in the machines or other capital
goods to be produced by this plant. Plant equipped to satisfy a
demand for machinery which cannot be permanently maintained is, in
this sense, part of a roundabout process which cannot be continued.
For a fuller description, see Prices and Production, Lecture III and,
especially, my article, Kapitalaufzehrung in the Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, July 1932.
224

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY

ratio of capital invested to capital still required.
It may therefore quite easily come about that, in
order to complete these newly initiated processes,
capital may be diverted from the maintenance
of complete and old-established undertakings,
so that new plant is put into operation and old
plant closed down, although the latter would have
been kept up, and the former never put in hand,
if it had been a question of building up the whole
capital equipment of the economy from the start.
This does not merely mean that the total return
comes to less than it otherwise would; it also
means, primarily, that production is forced into
channels to which it will only keep for as long as
the new and spuriously produced stock of fixed
capital can remain in use. The value of capital
invested in processes which can be continued,
and, still more, that in processes where continuance
is impracticable, will shrink rapidly in value —
this shrinkage being accompanied by the phenomena of a crisis. Thus on purely technical
grounds it will become uneconomic to maintain
them. It should be particularly remarked that,
from the point of view of the fate of individual
p

225

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
enterprises, capital invested in fixed plant, but
raised by borrowing, is of precisely the same
importance as working capital, i.e. the loss of
value does not merely necessitate writing down,
it generally makes it impossible to carry on at all.
The cause of this development is, evidently,
that an unwarranted accumulation of capital has
been taking place; though people may regard it
(under the alluring name of * forced saving') as a
thoroughly desirable phenomenon. After what
has been said above it is probably more proper to
regard forced saving as the cause of economic crises
than to expect it to restore a balanced structure of
production.
VII

There remains one problem of interest theory,
in the wider sense of the word, which we need
to examine more closely than we have yet done
— in order to exhibit a problem of first-class importance to the progress of Trade Cycle theory.
This is the problem of the varying height and independent movements of rates of interest ruling
at the same place and at the same time. We are
226

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY

not thinking, of course, of differences conditioned
either by the unequal standing of borrowers or
by the fact that under the name of interest payments
are also made for the services or costs connected
with the granting of credit. We are interested
only in the problem of variations arising within
the pure or net rate of interest, as they can be
observed between credits of varying duration —
the problem usually known in economic literature
as the problem of interest rates, in the money, and
in the capital (investment) market, respectively.
In this respect we may repeat what we have
already said at the beginning of this chapter —
that the theoretical investigations of interest have
been broken off at far too early a stage to afford
much understanding of the rates actually ruling
at any given moment. It is very remarkable that
none of the great theorists to whom we owe our
insight into the fundamental factors determining
the equilibrium rate of interest made the slightest
attempt to explain these differences between
interest rates. Systematic investigation of this
problem came much later and then characteristically the investigation related chiefly to the
PI

227

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
question of the 'external order of the capital or
money market'; and it is only recently that Dr.
G. Halm* has treated the simultaneous existence of
varying interest rates 'as a problem of interest
theory'. Although Dr. Halm deserves full credit
for the undeniable service he has rendered in
putting the problem in the proper form for
discussion, his attempt at solution can hardly be
regarded as fully successful. Thus we still stand
* 'Das Zinsproblem am Geld und Kapitalmarkt' Jahrbucher fiir
Nationalokonomie und Statistik, 3rd series, No. 125, vol. 70, Jena
1926. Of the comprehensive bibliography given by Halm, the following, together with some more recent additions, are worth mention:
A. Spiethoff: (1) Die dussere Ordnung des Kapital und Geldmarktes;
(2) Das Verhdltnis von Kapital, Geld und Gutertoelt; (3) Der Kapitalmangel in seinem Verhdltnis zur Giiterwelt; all in Schmloler's Jahrbuch, vol. 33 (Miinchen, 1909). Also, by the same author: Der
Begriff des Kapital und Geldmarktes, Schmoller's Jahrbuch, vol. 44,
1920. H. von Beckerath Kapital und Geldmarkt (Jena 1916).
Professor Schumpeter's Dr. Neisser's and Professor Fetter's works
already mentioned; A. Hahn: Zur Theorie des Geldmarktes (Archiv
fiir Sozialwissenschaften und Sozialpolitik, vol. 51, Tubingen, 1924).
Karin Kock: A Study of Interest Rates, Stockholm Economic
Studies, No. 1, London, 1929.
W. W. Riefler, Money Rates and Markets in the United States
(New York and London, 1930).
The problems arising out of empirical research are well summarized by O. Dormer and A. Hanau, 'Untersunchung zur Frage der
Marktzusammenhange' (Vierteljahrshefte zur Konjunkturforschung,
3rd year, No. 3 A, Institut fur Konjunkturforschung, Berlin 1928), an
investigation which is a model of its kind.
228

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY

at the beginning of a crucially important development of a special theory of money rates of
interest.
The clearing up of these interconnections is
of primary importance to Trade Cycle theory,
since the discrepancies between the expected
yields of existing means of production and the
actual yield obtainable from the available liquid
capital must necessarily arise in the course of the
cycle. Given a sufficient insight into the influences
determining the yields of both types of investment,
the simultaneous changes in the height of both
kinds of interest rates should afford extraordinarily
valuable material for the diagnosis of any actual
situation, and thus the growth of this part of
interest theory would provide an important basis
for the development of empirical research and
forecasting. A particularly promising approach
might consist in an examination of the question
from the point of view of an equalization of the
time-differences between the rates of interest
which would prevail if the whole supply of capital,
at any time, had to be invested for a longer period.
Such an equalization would be brought about by
229

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
a kind of arbitrage for which, naturally, only
money lent at call or at short notice could be
considered.
In this field, too, the extension of equilibrium
analysis to successively occurring phenomena,
which I have attempted in another work,* may
prove fruitful. At any rate, an explanation of this
arbitrage could also explain why the rates on shortterm credits can be temporarily lower, or on the
other hand higher, than the long-term rate, since
both borrower and lender would find such an
arbitrage to their advantage. This view cannot
be refuted by the objection that the rates on shortterm credits not only change earlier but also
change to a greater degree than those in the
capital market; for it may be economically entirely
justifiable to pay higher rates or obtain lower
ones, for a short term, than one expects for a long
term, since the expectation of getting better terms
at a later period, under more favourable conditions,
may compensate for the relative disadvantages
suffered in the short run.
• Cf. 'Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtssystem der Preise und die
Bewegungen des Geldwertes'- already quoted.
230

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
VIII
Finally, we should like to point out quite
briefly certain tasks in the field of statistical
research which according to our theoretical analysis
seem likely to be particularly fruitful. In connection
with the last question dealt with, we should draw
attention to the statistics of the money market,
which are still, unfortunately, in a very elementary
stage, partly for technical reasons but mainly
because of difficulties of interpretation. These
latter arise largely from the fact that the statistical
determination of the absolute height of the
interest rate, or even of its movements, discloses
almost nothing as to its bearing on the economic
system.# The same rate of interest which at one
moment may be too low in relation to the whole
economic situation may be too high at the next,
or vice versa. Misunderstandings on this point
may be responsible for certain erroneous views,
* The statistical determination of nominal changes in the interest
rate is also rendered very difficult by the fact that changes can take
place in the form of changes in stipulations as to the quality of the
bills discounted at a given rate, and so on. The same rate may be
merely applied to a better class of borrowers, or the same borrowers
may be required to pay a higher rate.
231

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
concerning the alleged insignificance of the height
of interest rates, which are often held by statistical economists. The innumerable attempts to
minimize the significance of interest rates by
means of statistical investigations, which abound
in the United States* (where they do not even
shrink from such absurdities as an attempt to
find an explanation (!) of interest by way of statistical investigation) would be impossible but for
the complete confusion persisting as to the limits
of statistical research. Here again we have to
repeat what was asserted at the beginning of this
book: statistics can never prove or disprove a theoretical explanation, they can only present problems
or offer fields for theoretical research.
For precisely this reason —viz. that the absolute height of interest rates tells us nothing of
their significance — an examination of the extent
and regularity of shifts between various interest
rates offers a promising field for statistical technique. An interesting first attempt in this direction
• Cf. e.g. Snyder, 'The Influence of the Interest Rate on the
Business Cycle,' American Economic Review, vol. xv, December
1925; reprinted in Business Cycles and Business Measurements (New

York, 1927).
232

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
is the famous * Three Market Barometer' of the
Harvard Economic Service, which uses the trend
of the long-term interest rate as a base-line in
plotting the curve of the money market rates.
Such an empirical consideration of the differences
between interest rates does not, of course, exhaust
the lines of approach which a complete theoretical
explanation of these rates might indicate as
suitable for empirical research. The fact that
theoretical research itself can be stimulated and
awakened to new problems to an important
degree from the application of our sketchy knowledge to statistical investigations is amply demonstrated by the investigations of Donner and Hanau,
which we have already mentioned.
It is in the statistics of private banking, however,
that the heaviest task presents itself. In Europe
we are still worse supplied with these than with
those of the money market proper. In the United
States, on the other hand, some pioneer work
has been done in this field,* since the ample
• Cf. first of all A. A. Young, 'An Analysis of Bank Statistics for the
United States' (reprinted from The Review of Economic Statistics,

October 1924, January and April 1925, and July 1927) (Cambridge
1928); H. Working/Prices and the Quantity of the Circulating Medium,
233

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
statistical material available there provided is
itself a sufficient incentive for such investigations.
In Europe the lack of any kind of material makes
even a first step in this direction impossible.
In many respects the most remarkable of these
enquiries are those of Mr. Holbrook Working.
Using the data concerning the state of deposits in
the 'National Banks', which are available for many
years past and at intervals of only a few months,
he succeeds in establishing a far-reaching parallelism between the movements of deposits and the
fluctuations of the wholesale price-level. Like
most theoretical investigations in the same field,
however, his results are distorted by the superficial assumption that monetary influences can only
manifest themselves in movements of the price
1890-1921' {The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. xxxvii,
Cambridge, 1923) and 'Bank Deposits as a Forecaster of the General
Wholesale Price Level' {The Review of Economic Statistics, Cambridge, Mass., 1926) of the same author, C. Snyder, 'Deposits
Activity as a Measure of Business Activity' {Review of Economic
Statistics, Cambridge, Mass., 1924, reprinted in Business Cycles
and Business Measurements. New York, 1927), W. M. Persons,
'Cyclical Fluctuations of the Ratio of Bank Loans to Deposits'
{Review of Economic Statistics, Cambridge, Mass., 1924). L. A.
Hahn, 'Zur Frage des volkswirtschaftlichen Erkenntnisinhaltes der
Bankbilanzziffern' {Vierteljahrshefte zur Konjunkturforschung, 1,
Jahrgang, Erganzungsheft 4, Berlin, 1927).
234

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
level, while those changes in the volume of bank
credits which are just sufficient to prevent changes
in the price level are supposed, on this assumption,
to exercise no active influence on the Trade
Cycle. It should be mentioned —as having
particular bearing upon the views developed in
this essay — that, according to Mr. Working's
calculations, before the War a yearly increase in
deposits of more than 5 per cent would have been
necessary in order to keep the price-level steady;
that is to say, additional credits would have had
to be created to an extent which must have caused
considerable changes in the structure of production.
If the results of our theoretical analysis were to
be subjected to statistical investigation, it is not
the connection between changes in the volume of
bank credit and movements in the price level
which would have to be explored. Investigation
would have to start on the one hand from alterations in the rate of increase and decrease in the
volume and turnover of bank deposits and, on the
other, from the extent of production in those
industries which as a rule expand excessively as
235

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
a result of credit injection.*8 Every increase in the
circulating media brings about the same effect,
so long as each stands in the same proportion to
the existing volume; and only an increase in this
proportion makes possible a further increase in
investment activity. On the other hand, every
diminution of the rate of increase in itself causes
some portion of existing investment, made possible
through credit creation, to become unprofitable.
It follows that a curve exhibiting the monetary
influences on the course of the cycle ought to
show, not the movements in the total volume of
circulating media, but the alteration in the rate of
change of this volume.*)* Every up-turn of this
curve would show that an artificial lowering of
the money rate of interest or, if the curve was
already rising, a further lowering of the money
rates, was making possible additional investments
• Cf. the instructive graphs given by Harold L. Reed in his Federal
Reserve Policy 1921-1930 (New York and London 1930), pp. 181
et seq.

t Mathematically speaking, the question is one of the graphical
presentation, in place of the curve showing the original movements
at any moment, of the first differential of this function. On the
subject of this method, which has been frequently used of late, cf.
I. Fisher, The Business Cycle Largely a 'Dance of the Dollar* (Quarterly

Publication of the American Statistical Association. December, 1923).
236

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
for which voluntary savings would not suffice;
and every down-turn would show that current
credit-creation was no longer sufficient to ensure
the continuance of all the enterprises which it
originally called into existence. It would be of
great interest to correlate this presentation of the
influence causing an excessive production of capital
goods with actual changes in the production of
these goods, on the basis of available data.
The possible contributions of banking statistics
to Trade Cycle research are by no means exhausted
by the chance they offer of observing the immediate connection between the granting of credit and
the movements of production, though these may
some day constitute the most important basis of
business forecasting. No less important would be
an investigation into the volume, at any given
moment, of those factors which determine credit
expansion, under the other headings of bank
balance sheets, and, in particular, an examination
of the relation between the total amount of earning
assets and the current accounts, the relation
between these and the cash-circulation, and so on.
Such an investigation, if it were not merely to
237

MONETARY THEORY AND THE TRADE CYCLE
exhibit their movements in time but also to
analyse the deeper connections between them, and
most especially if it were to clear up the relationship between interest rates, profits, and the
liquidity of the banks, would further our insight
into the factors determining credit expansion as
well as our knowledge of their limits, and thus
make it possible to forecast movements in the
factors determining the total development of the
economic situation.
It is very unfortunate that such inquiries,
especially on the continent of Europe, are almost
impossible owing to the lack of necessary data
in the form of returns showing the state of the
banks, and published at short intervals; in so far
as they are possible at all it is only in a few countries and for a very short period. As soon as it is
realized that, owing to the existence of banks, the
equilibrating forces of the economic system
cannot bring about that automatic adjustment of
all its branches to the actual situation, which is
described by classical economic theory, it is
justifiable even from a liberal point of view that
the banks should be subjected to degrees of pub238

UNSETTLED PROBLEMS OF THEORY
licity as to the state of their business which is not
necessary in the case of other undertakings; and
this would by no means imply a violation of the
principle of business secrecy, since it would be
quite sufficient for this purpose if the authorities
were to adopt the United States' plan of publishing
summary returns for all banks at frequent intervals.
Our reflections thus yield the conclusion that an
alleviation of cyclical fluctuations should be
expected pre-eminently from a greater publicity
among business enterprises, and particularly
among the banks. The example of the United
States, which is far ahead in this respect in all the
branches of its economic system, will not only
silence in time the objections raised against such
publicity, but sooner or later will force us to
follow in their path.

239

INDEX OF AUTHORS CITED

INDEX OF AUTHORS CITED
AFTALION, A., 62, 63

FANNO, M., 212

Altschul, E., 31
Amonn, A., 204
Angell, J. W., n o

Ferrara, F., 153
Fetter, F. A., 180, 207, 228
Fisher, I., 106, 153, 210, 236
Foster, W. T., 97

BECKERATH, H. U., 228

Behrens, W. G., 118
Bergmann, E. v.t 131
Bdhm-Bawerk, E. v.t 126, 131,
203
Bortkiewiez, L. v.t 118
Bouniatian, M., 143, 156, 166
Bradford, F. A., 172
Budge, S., 78, i n , 181, 189
Bullock, C. J., 38
Burchardt, F., 105, 121, 122,
126, 141, 209
CANNAN, E., 153

GREGORY, T. E., 153

Giffen, R., n o
HABERLER, G., 153

Hahn, L. A., 111, 144, 153, 164,
228, 234
Halm, G., 205, 210, 211, 228
Hanau, A., 228, 233
Hansen, A. H., 53
Hardy, C. O., 66
Hawtrey, R. G., 141, 153, 168,
181, 190
Heinze, G., 203

Carell, E., 33, 94
Carver, T. N., 63

J6HR, A., 155, 164

Cassel, G., 41, 58, 81, 97, 106, Juglar, C , 148
133, i34. 204
Crick, W. F., 153, 161, 171
KEYNES, J. M., 80
Knapp, G. F., 117
DAVENPORT, H. J., 153
Kock, K., 228
Davidson, D., 115
Koopmans, J. G., 118
Dernburg, B., 164, 165,167
LAMPE, A., 205, 214
Dormer, O., 228, 233
Lawrence, J. S., 172
Dunbar, C. F., 153
Leaf, W., iS3, 164
Lederer, E., 58, 97, 129
EGNER, E., 209, 219
Lescure, J., 58, 97, 129
Eucken, W., 78, 114
243

INDEX
L6we, A., 27, 29, 33, 42, S3, 93,
94, 105, 121, 122, 127, 141,
144, 184, 188
MACLEOD, H. D., n o ,

153

Marshall, A., n o , 139
Menger, C , 117
Miksch, L., 42
Mill, James, 42
Mill, J. S., 208, 219
Miller, A. C , 22
Mises, L., 47, 48, n o , m , 116,
117, 118, 119, 124, 128, 133,
144, 145, 150, 153, x8x, 211,
219
Mitchell, W. C , 53, 58, 63, 97,
129
Morgenstern, O., 36, 83, 192
NEISSER, H., 145, 153, 163,

164,

176, 219, 228
Nicholson, J. S., n o
PENNINGTON, J.,

REED, H. L.,

153

236

J. B., 42, 101
Schlesinger, K., 139, 164
Schumpeter, J., 57, 60, 97, 163,
168, 183, 219, 228.
Sidgwick, H., n o
Snyder, C , 232, 234
Spiethoff, A., 41, 79, 80, 89, 90,
105, 133, 134, 228
Strigl, R., 181
Stucken, R., 115
SAY,

THORNTON, H., 109, 152,

219

Timoshenko, V. P., 168
Tooke, T., 153
Torrens, R., 153
WALRAS, L.,

Persons, W. M., 38, 53, 234
Phillips, C. O., 153, 154, 161, 172
Pigou, A. C , 31, 83, 191, 220
Reisch, R., 153, 155, 164, 165
Ricardo, D., n o
Riefler, W. W., 228

Robertson, D. H., 62, 63, 64
115, 219, 220
Rodkey, R. G., 153
Rdpke, W., 46, i n , 181, 188,
209, 219

218

Weber, A., 153, 211
Wicksell, K., 34, 47, n o , i n ,
ii3#, 128, 133, 134, 145, 146,
148, 153, 178, 209, 210, 211,
212, 219
Wieser, F., 108
Withers, H., 153, 154
Working, H., 233, 234, 235
YOUNG, A. A.,

244

233

